The Farm to Market Handbook
Quick Tip Guides For Accessing Five Major
Marketing Channels
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
© 2021 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF) www.caff.org. Authored by CAFF staff: Josefina
Lara Chavez, Michelle Wyler, Ben Thomas, and Yousef Buzayan. This resource is available at www.-
caff.org. Some content adapted from CAFF’s 2013 Farmers' Marketing and Sales Notebook: A Post-Harvest Resource for California Specialty Crop Growers by: Bob Corshen, CAFF staff: Ben Thomas, Michelle
Wyler, and Megan Contrera; David Visher, Visher Consulting, Ronit Ridberg, Ridberg Consulting, National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT), UC Davis Researchers: Christine Yeakley, Carina Kuttering,
Jasmine Nazari, Malie Frelinger, Chuck Devers; and Farm Credit’s Gary Matteson & Erin Pirro
Funding for this publication was made possible by the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Agricultural Marketing Service through grant AM200100XXXXG032. Its contents are solely the responsibility of
the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the USDA.
The Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF) is a non-profit organization that advocates for
California family farmers and sustainable agriculture through practical, on-the-ground programs. CAFF
builds partnerships between family farmers and their communities to create local economic vitality,
improved human and environmental health, and long-term sustainability of family farms.
This Farm to Market Handbook is designed to help farmers access markets. It provides information,
selling tips and internet links to top informational sites for five major marketing channels. Information
on additional marketing channels not included can be found in our 2013 guide referenced above. 
The Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF) is a non-profit
organization that advocates for California family farmers and sustainable
agriculture through practical, on-the-ground programs. CAFF builds
partnerships between family farmers and their communities to create local
economic vitality, improved human and environmental health, and long-term
sustainability of family farms.
This Farm to Market Handbook is designed to help the family access markets.
It provides information, selling tips and internet links to top informational
sites for the five major marketing channels. Information on additional
marketing channels can be found in our 2013 guide.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
Preface
Farmers Markets
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA)
Direct to Retail
Direct to Schools
Direct to Wholesale
Food Safety
Table of Contents
1
3
5
7
11
14
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
Farmers Markets
Farmers' markets are temporary retail
establishments where farmers can sell their
products. They are typically held outside and
can be seasonal or year-round. They can be a
good entry-level sales channel, especially for
beginning farmers. There are over 8,500
farmers’ markets in the U.S. and popularity
remains strong.
For This Market You Can Expect
• Lower volume of product
• High price per unit
• High investment of time
Price Setting
The easiest way to determine a price point for
your product at farmers’ market is to check the
prices at a local natural food store (not a big
grocery chain). If you are limited on time,
scanning the Whole Foods website and setting
it to your farmers’ market location might also
be a good option. We also recommend seeing
what other farmer’s market vendors at the
same market location are charging. Different
market locations can fetch different prices.
Lastly, consider your production costs, supply
and demand, and the season. Often low supply
and early/late season availability will fetch
premium prices.
Questions When Selecting a Market:
Which markets would you like to attend?
Does the market already have vendors with the
same products that you grow?
Do you feel like you can provide products that
differ from other growers?
Will you still be able to make a profit given the
distance you must travel, labor, and market fees?
How much time can you afford to be away from
the farm?
Who will sell your products if you cannot be at the
market and at what cost?
 Are you committed to being a regular vendor at
farmers’ markets given that markets tend to
require consistent participation and that a repeat
customer base takes time to build?
1
How can I be successful at
the farmer’s market?
Understand the social aspect of this sales
channel.
Understand the importance of knowing and
following farmers’ market’s rules and
regulations.
Have the ability to accept the authority of the
market manager/ market board of directors.
Understand that while a farm operation is an
individual business, in a farmers’ market, each
farmer is part of a cooperative store and you
have to abide by decisions made for the whole
market, not just for the individual farmer.
 Have competency in post-harvest
handling–this includes knowing when to
harvest and still get the product to market
while it’s looking its best.
Food Safety and Regulation
Guidance
Food safety: See general food safety
information in the food safety section at the
end of this guide.
Labeling requirements: exempt from the
standard pack and some labeling
requirements. See Community Alliance with
Family Farmers Direct Marketing in CA Rules
And Regulation Guide for guidance
caff.org/directmarketingincalifornia
UCCE rules/regulations guidance:
ucanr.edu/sites/CESonomaAgOmbuds/Produc
e_Farming/
Liability insurance: Product liability insurance
is an important consideration, and in some
cases, is required. It’s designed to protect you
if someone becomes sick from your product.
The amount of insurance you need depends
on the products you are selling and your end
market. Farmers should speak to other
farmers and an insurance agent.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
2
Additional Resources
The Farmers Market Coalition Resource Library farmersmarketcoalition.org/education/resource-library/
How to set up a good farmers market display video: youtube.com/watch?v=u1v9EluncKo
Find a market with CDFA’s Certified Farmers’ Markets by County Document
cdfa.ca.gov/is/docs/CurrentMrktsCounty.pdf
National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT) ATTRA resources attra.ncat.org
Farmers’ market marketing tips: attra.ncat.org/product/ncat-marketing-tip-sheet-series/
Farms Reach for determining profit margins and costs:
blog.farmsreach.com/marketing-sales-series-pt-2-pricing-your-products-tracking-sales/#more-6450 
Community
Supported
Agriculture (CSA)
CSA is a system of direct marketing where
consumers commit to a farmer at the
beginning of the growing season for a weekly
box of fresh fruits and vegetables. Farmers use
up-front payments to cover the cost of seeds,
tools, and other inputs at the start of the
season. By paying at the beginning of the
season, CSA members share in the risk of
production and decrease the time needed for
marketing. This means that even if there is an
unsuccessful harvest, the members still pay
the same amount for the season ensuring that
“their” farm survives over time. While many
traditional, full-season CSAs exist, many have
transitioned to customer-centered models like
customizable boxes, free choice options, or
even week-to-week commitments. Regardless,
a CSA farm has the opportunity to cultivate a
very loyal customer base.
For This Market You Can Expect
• Lower, top-quality volumes
• High variety (40+ items)
• Higher prices per unit.
• High investment of time
In a CSA, the crops are sold at retail prices (Please
see Farmers’ Market section for more information).
Calculate the cost per share by estimating the
market price of the included product for an
average share multiplied by the number of weeks
in a share. Payment methods vary greatly: set fee,
sliding scale, pre-paid free-choice cards, and even
SNAP payments. Be sure to add in delivery fees if
you are offering delivery.
Price Setting
3
Key Questions to Ask Yourself
About CSAs
Timing and planning are critical in a CSA. Do I have
the skillset to ensure consistent, weekly harvests
of a large variety of top-quality products for my
CSA customers? See ATTRA’s “Scheduling Vegetable
Plantings for a Continuous Harvest” or CSA
Innovation Network’s videos/ resources.
How many CSA farms are in my area? Do they have
waiting lists/unmet demand that I could tap into?
Are there other farms interested in starting a
multi-farm CSA to increase the diversity of offerings?
Will I enjoy the social/customer service aspects of
running a CSA, such as weekly communications,
hosting gatherings or workdays for members,
writing newsletters, or compiling recipes?
Do I have excellent organizational skills and
systems or do I have the funds to invest in
e-commerce software?
How Can I be Successful at a CSA?
Build community through efforts such as
harvest parties, workdays, and newsletters.
Conduct annual surveys to get customer
feedback on quality, variety, and service.
Consider collaborating with other CSA farms if
you want to offer a wider selection
.
Include fun events such as a field day where
you can open up your farm to a diverse group
of people. Understand that much of CSA is
about customer service which takes time.
Educating members about seasonality, recipes,
and farming are all part of the experience and
relationship maintenance.
Attracting new customers AND retaining
existing ones is paramount.
Food Safety and Regulation
Guidance
Food safety fact sheets have been provided for
your reference, please see (add link)
Community Alliance with Family Farmers Direct
Marketing Rules And Regulation Guide
Labeling requirements: exempt from standard
pack and some labeling requirements. See
CAFF’s Direct Marketing Rules And Regulation
Guide found here
Liability insurance: Product liability insurance is
an important consideration, and in some
cases, is required. It is designed to protect you
if someone becomes sick from your product.
The amount of insurance you need depends
on the products you are selling and your end
market. Farmers should speak to an insurance
agent.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
4
Additional Resources
CSA Innovation Network Resources https://www.csainnovationnetwork.org/
CSA Starts Here: An educational video series for aspiring and beginning CSA Farmers
https://www.csainnovationnetwork.org/csa-starts-here
Farmer to Farmer Ecommerce Platform Comparison Report
https://www.csainnovationnetwork.org/ecommerce-report
My Digital Farmer: Online marketing strategies to help CSAs grow their business.
https://mydigitalfarmer.com/
CSA focused Facebook: CSA Marketing Discussion Group and CSA Farmer Discussion Group
CAFF’s Farm Hub Tech hub: https://caff.org/small-farm-tech-hub/: tech and e-commerce support
National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT) ATTRA www.attra.ncat.org.
CSA Marketing Tip Sheet: https://attra.ncat.org/product/ncat-marketing-tip-sheet-series/
Farms Reach: Tools to determine if profiting on transactions, covering costs, making a profit.
http://blog.farmsreach.com/marketing-sales-series-pt-2-pricing-your-products-tracking-sales/#more-6450 
Direct to Retail
Grocery stores, especially natural foods stores,
typically buy large volumes of fresh produce
and prefer to support local farms. Very large
grocery chains (e.g. Safeway, Kroger, SaveMart)
are more difficult to sell into, especially for
small and midsize farmers. An emerging
market that also tends to purchase from local,
small and midsize farmers are online grocers,
businesses-like Good Eggs, inc., and Imperfect
Foods. Similarly, restaurants are another
attractive direct-to-retail opportunity that
fetches higher prices, requires less volume,
and helps to diversify one’s sales channels.
Depending on location, restaurants can be
supportive or difficult to access. Some
challenges include: securing a meeting, chef
turnover, and budgetary constraints; however,
once secured this is an excellent opportunity
for a deep buying relationship.
For This Market You Can Expect
• Low to medium volume
• Low to high price per unit (grocery
lower; restaurant medium to high)
• Medium investment of time
Price Setting
One way to set prices for a retail buyer is to
check websites or sign up to receive availability
sheets from local distributors, food hubs,
Packaging and labeling:
Packaging products is an important part of
selling direct. If in doubt, ask the store about
their expectations and requirements.
Do they want the items in small containers or
bulk?
Does the product need to be delivered in a
standard pack, by weight, etc.? Size, color,
maturity and shape should be as uniform as
possible within a package.
Are new boxes required for delivery?
Consider reviewing the Wholesale Packing
Resource Guide for further information.
Labeling packages help to keep track of the
produce as it moves through the system, from
farm to wholesaler or retailer.
5
brokers, etc. that have similar product and
mirror price points. This is attractive to retailer
buyers because it is very likely they are
purchasing from those businesses already,
therefore by providing a similar price point you
are providing a good alternative that can switch
to without compromising their yields.
Restaurants tend to pay slightly lower than
farmers’ market prices. See resource section
below for helpful pricing tools. Consider your
production costs, delivery fees, seasonality, and
type of establishment too.
Other considerations:
Many stores will require that you carry product
liability insurance. Be sure to add this to your
costs.
Some products such as meat and organic
produce require certification, approval or
registration. These certifications should also be
taken into consideration as an expense.
Some very large stores may require a Dun and
Bradstreet number (DUNS Number) to approve
you as a business. This number is a way of
tracking and monitoring companies and can
be expensive, so find out if this is required
before applying for one.
Generally, the smaller the grocer, the lower the
required volume. FInd an appropriate match
with whom you can build a relationship.
Smaller stores and chains generally have an
in-house buyer who coordinates aggregation,
while larger chains have major central
warehouses. Start small to get to know this
marketing channel before expanding to larger,
more complex accounts.
Food Safety and Regulation
Guidance
Food safety fact sheets have been
provided for your reference, please see
(add link)
Community Alliance with Family Farmers
Direct Marketing Rules And Regulation
Guide
Labeling requirements: exempt from
standard pack and some labeling
requirements. See CAFF’s Direct Marketing
Rules And Regulation Guide found here
Liability insurance: Product liability
insurance is an important consideration,
and in some cases, is required. It is
designed to protect you if someone
becomes sick from your product. The
amount of insurance you need depends on
the products you are selling and your end
market. Farmers should speak to an
insurance agent.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
6
Additional Resources
The Farmers Market Coalition Resource Library farmersmarketcoalition.org/education/resource-library/
How to set up a good farmers market display video: youtube.com/watch?v=u1v9EluncKo
Find a market with CDFA’s Certified Farmers’ Markets by County Document
cdfa.ca.gov/is/docs/CurrentMrktsCounty.pdf
National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT) ATTRA resources attra.ncat.org
Farmers’ market marketing tips: attra.ncat.org/product/ncat-marketing-tip-sheet-series/
Farms Reach for determining profit margins and costs:
blog.farmsreach.com/marketing-sales-series-pt-2-pricing-your-products-tracking-sales/#more-6450
At a minimum, labels must contain the following
information under FDA regulations: Common
name of the product, net weight, count and/or
volume, name, and address of producer, packer,
or distributor, country, or region of origin.
Direct to Schools
Many communities nationwide are now
adopting Farm to School programs. They see
the educational and nutritional values of
providing fresh and local food for students and
economic benefits to supporting local farms.
This gives farmers the opportunity to
contribute to a positive movement by selling
directly to schools, while simultaneously
expanding their market and revenue streams.
School customers tend to pay slightly more
than large-scale wholesale for slightly lower
volumes while providing more consistent
purchasing relationships than chefs at
restaurants, making them a more accessible
wholesale market channel for small farmers.
For This Market You Can Expect
• Low to high volumes depending on the
size of the school
• Low to medium price per unit
• Medium investment of time
Price Setting
The most helpful process for setting pricing is
to stay in communication with the food service
department. School districts tend to provide
farmers with higher prices than wholesale and
lower prices than CSAs and Farmers Markets,
Contact your local School District
Food Service Director
School District Child Nutrition Directors’ contact
info are provided publicly on school district
websites. Like other customers, all school
districts are different sizes and have different
needs. Most are centrally managed by a head
Director and some also have purchasing or
“procurement” managers. Reach out to your
School District Child Nutrition Director/ main
office for advice regarding the following:
Whether they have interest and budget (such as
from grants) to purchase from local farmers.
Specifically what farm products the schools are
looking to purchase.
7
but the advantage is that school districts tend to
buy higher volumes. Ask the food service
department what they are currently paying for
the product through their distributor and
provide them with a sample to show the quality
of your product. School districts may be willing
to negotiate prices for micro-purchases based
on quality, volume, delivery time, educational
opportunities, and promotions. School district
buyers have varying budgets, local goals,
delivery locations, and processing capabilities
keep this in mind when communicating with the
school district nutrition services department.
Local partners may be able to refer you to
interested school districts. Go to
farmtoschool.org/our-network to find partners
near you who can help.
If the district has the ability to process what
you’re growing or whether they need it
pre-processed.
Delivery specifications - what days do they accept
deliveries and to how many sites?
Payment terms.
Any documents the school district may need to
register a farm as a vendor, such as a W-9.
Neither the State nor Federal Governments
require that School Districts only purchase from
farms with 3rd party food safety certification. All
school districts are different - some school
districts require this certification from all farms
that they purchase from, while others do not
require it at all or when buying directly from
small farms or food hubs.
Be prepared to have this conversation with the
school food buyer or aggregator that you’re
working with.
Choosing Products Popular
with Children
New Farm to School programs will likely
start with whole fruits that you can eat with
your hands without chopping (“hand fruits”),
such as apples and oranges, depending on
the season.
More mature programs may be interested
in vegetables and herbs, such as broccoli,
carrots, and parsley, as they first require
preparation and proper facilities to be in
place.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
8
Calendar Considerations
Typically, school district child nutrition
programs operate from August-June, with very
little purchasing happening over the summer,
during the first and last month of the school
year, and during holiday breaks.
Some school districts run summer meal
programs and plan for Farm to Summer events
and local purchasing. When contacting a
school food service department ask them if
they intend to make any local purchases over
the summer.
The Business Side
There are typically no long-term contracts
between individual farmers and schools.
The dealings are often between the farmers
and the Food Service Director in small- to
mid-sized districts, especially in rural areas.
The dealings are usually between farmers
and aggregators, such as food hubs or
distributors, in large districts. Some large
districts purchase directly from farmers.
Most districts have flexibility in purchasing
outside of their contracted vendors and
many purchase 5%-10% or more directly
from farms and food hubs.
Depending on the total amount and time
frame of a school district’s purchase, they
have to follow different rules and
regulations. In most cases, if each sale is
under $50,000, the district does not need to
compare multiple quotes or create a
contract.
Common relationships between farmers and
schools begin with the farm selling surplus
produce for a school promotional event as a
creative short-term solution that may lead to
seasonal dealings.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
9
Payment terms through school districts can
vary. Ask them when vendors usually receive
payment.
Farmers may not receive payment until a
few weeks after delivery.
The school district will require a W-9 form to
register the farm as a vendor before
purchasing. Contact the food service
department for more information on what
documents they need and if they have a
vendor registration process.
You may elect to become more
involved with the programs
Farm visits can be a great learning experience
for students. If you are interested in bringing
students to your farm for a field trip, reach out
to the food service department and see if they
can connect you with teachers or garden
educators that would be interested in organizing
a student field trip to your farm.
If the school district hosts Career Day events,
contact the school district and see if you could
be a part of the event and present to the
students on your experiences as a farmer.
If any of the district school sites have a garden,
consider offering consultation or making a small
donation of seeds or plants.
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
10
Additional Resources
Bringing the Farm to School: Agricultural Producers' Toolkit
www.farmtoschool.org/our-work/bringing-the-farm-to-school-producer-resources
USDA Fact Sheet - School Purchasing Decision Tree:
fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/resource-files/USDA_OCFS_FactSheet_DecisionTree_english_10_3_v3.pdf
National Farm to School Network: www.farmtoschool.org/resources
Virginia Cooperative Extension:
https://www.pubs.ext.vt.edu/content/dam/pubs_ext_vt_edu/AEE/AEE-77/ALCE-181.pdf
Tips for Selling to Schools attra.ncat.org/product/ncat-marketing-tip-sheet-series/
Useful tools for farmers to determine if profiting on transactions, covering costs, making a profit.
http://blog.farmsreach.com/marketing-sales-series-pt-2-pricing-your-products-tracking-sales/#more-6450
Food Safety and Regulation
Guidance
Food safety: See general food safety
information in the food safety section at the
end of this guide.
Labeling packages help to keep track of the
produce as it moves through the system, from
farm to wholesaler or retailer. At a minimum,
labels must contain the following information
under FDA regulations:
Common name of the product, net weight,
count and/or volume, name, and address of
the producer, packer, or distributor, country,
or region of origin.
Direct to Wholesale
There are different types of wholesale
channels: aggregators/grower-marketing
cooperatives, produce brokers, produce
distributors, produce packing houses,
wholesale buyers at terminal markets, and
food access programs.
At the time of the publishing of this handbook,
buyer demand for product from small local
farms, especially those that are BIPOC, or
women-owned, is rapidly growing in California.
Direct wholesale customers vary widely in
needs and expectations but finding the right fit
can help farmers build their businesses.
For This Market You Can Expect
• High volumes
• Lower prices
• Low time commitment
Price Setting
Selling wholesale might be the most
challenging market channel when determining
the price because the price may be subject to
hidden fees and costs. We suggest that
farmers have a clear conversation with their
wholesale buyers to get an understanding of
how they determine the price. Additionally,
there are many price-setting websites. We
suggest Produce Pay (producepay.com).
Considerations
You can sell a larger quantity, but expect a lower
price per unit.
Wholesale buyers typically pay within 30 days,
you must determine how that will affect your
cash flow.
Farmers can set prices, but the buyer must
agree to it. Farmers must have a good idea of
what the going prices are in the wholesale
market.
Farmers must meet packing and grading
standards.
Consider your wholesale buyer’s post-harvest
requirements and whether the product must be
delivered in a refrigerated truck.
Selling to a wholesale buyer requires a
well-organized invoicing and recordkeeping
system.
Wholesale buyers have varying food safety
requirements for farmers to make sure that
they meet.
11
Websites usually have a fee but it is an easy way
for a farmer to get real-time pricing information.
A free resource available is also the USDA Terminal
Markets, for more information please see
Additional Resources at the end of the section. 
Questions for Buyers
What is your onboarding process?
How many small farms do you currently
source from?
What’s your farmer contracting process?
What is your purchasing process and
frequency? How often do you need an
availability sheet?
Do you require any certifications?
Do you require a particular packaging style?
What are the costs associated with selling to
you? Ie. do I need to use/purchase your boxes,
labels, barcodes, etc? Can I use my own label?
What is your turnaround time for payment?
What is your preferred method of
communication?
When do you order and need confirmation
and delivery?
What should I be conscious of when selling to
you?
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
12
Key Questions to Ask Yourself
How far away is the nearest wholesale market?
Do I want to put the effort into establishing
relationships with buyers? Would I rather go
through a broker?
How do buyers want produce packed and
delivered?
How much volume is needed to supply
wholesale buyers?
Tips for Selling to Wholesale
Buyers
Identify and contact wholesale buyers before
you try to sell to them.
Wholesalers may offer higher prices to farmers
if they have an established relationship, if the
farm has high-quality produce, and/or if the
farm is selling unique or specialty products
that are in high demand.
At Terminal Markets, visit the wholesale
market to get a better understanding of how
the wholesale market works and to learn
about other farms that sell to the wholesale
market. Talk to the wholesale buyer and show
them your produce. The same goes for
individual wholesale customers.
If you’re planning on making a wholesale
market or customer one of your regular sales
channels, prioritize delivering the wholesale
buyer your products on a consistent schedule.
Consistency and quality are keys to success in
the wholesale market.
Check the USDA Terminal Market Reports:
https://www.ams.usda.gov/market-news/fruit-and
-vegetable-terminal-markets-standard-reports
and simple custom report tool
https://www.marketnews.usda.gov/mnp/fv-home
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
13
Additional Resources
SARE Wholesale Packing Resource Guide: https://www.sare.org/wp-content/uploads/Wholesale-Packing-Resource-Guide.pdf
The SF Terminal Market: https://thesfmarket.org/visit
Sustainable Agriculture Research & Education Program (SAREP): https://sarep.ucdavis.edu/
A Guide to Selling Your Farm Produce Wholesale: https://www.food4all.com/a-guide-to-selling-your-farm-produce-wholesale/
National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT) ATTRA Marketing Tip Sheet: Tips for Selling to
Wholesale https://attra.ncat.org/product/ncat-marketing-tip-sheet-series/
USDA Agricultural Marketing Service price index: https://www.marketnews.usda.gov/mnp/fv-nav-byCom?navClass=VEGETABLES&navType=byComm
Farms Reach: useful tools for farmers to determine if profiting on transactions, covering costs,
making a profit.
http://blog.farmsreach.com/marketing-sales-series-pt-2-pricing-your-products-tracking-sales/#more-6450
Produce Pay: producepay.com: https://insights.producepay.com/auth/register?ref=website user friendly pricing
website.
Food Safety and Regulation
Guidance
Food safety: See general food safety
information in the food safety section at the
end of this guide.
Labeling packages help to keep track of the
produce as it moves through the system, from
farm to wholesaler or retailer. At a minimum,
labels must contain the following information
under FDA regulations: Common name of the
product, net weight, count and/or volume,
name, and address of the producer, packer, or
distributor, country, or region of origin.
UCCE rules/regulations guidance:
https://ucanr.edu/sites/CESonomaAgOmbuds/Pro
duce_Farming/
Food Safety
Food safety is an important topic for all
marketing channels. According to the USDA
Food Safety and Inspection Service (US FSIS),
food safety is defined as “A suitable product
which when consumed orally either by a
human or an animal does not cause health risk
to consumers.” There are three types of health
risks that can be caused by food:
1. Chemical – improperly stored, handled or
used chemicals can be a source of
contamination. Examples: fertilizers,
pesticides, cleaning agents, fuel, etc.
2. Physical – anything that is not meant to be in
the produce. Examples: screws, glass, staples,
wood, insects, etc.
3. Biological (Microbial) – viruses, bacteria,
parasites, or fungi, that cause illnesses and
sometimes even death. (Bacteria that are
disease-causing are referred to as pathogens.
Illnesses caused by eating contaminated foods
are referred to as foodborne illnesses or food
poisoning).
It is important to understand all three sources
of potential contamination, but biological
contamination is the biggest concern. This is in
part because the human sensory system
cannot see, taste, smell, or feel pathogens or
Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs)
There is no such thing as “zero-risk,” when it
comes to food safety, but practices and steps
need to be in place on farms to minimize any
potential risk of contamination. Food safety risks
may be reduced on the farm by following good
agricultural practices (GAPs). GAPs help growers
understand the practices and risks associated
with their farm, and help identify practical ways
to reduce the risk of contaminating produce
being grown, harvested, and packed on the
farm. Implementing GAPs helps decrease the
likelihood of a food safety outbreak.
Although the common principles of GAPs don’t
change from farm to farm, each GAP is unique,
as every grower does things differently.
GAPs focus on assessing the risk in the following
five key areas:
1. Water
2. Manure/Compost & Soil Amendments
3. Land Use (Previous/Adjacent) & Animal Access
(Domestic/Wildlife)
4. Equipment, Tools & Buildings
5. Employee Health & Hygiene
14
viruses, whereas we can often detect chemical
contamination through smell or taste and
physical contamination through touch or feel.
Biological contamination is also a main concern
because of the serious health implications of
these pathogens.
Food Safety Modernization
Act (FSMA)
In 2011 Congress passed and President Obama
signed into law the Food Safety Modernization
Act (FSMA). It was the first time we had a major
food safety overhaul across all sections of the
food system for 70 years. Now, with FSMA in
place, the federal government is regulating
on-farm food safety at produce farms. Annual
farm sales and a farm’s marketing channels
determine if a farmer is exempt, partially
exempt, or fully covered by FSMA. All farms
need to understand their status under FSMA
and the law’s food safety requirements for
their farm. See the Resource section below for
more information and help.
Costs vary significantly depending on your
location and the company you decide to use.
(Note: Always ask if your buyer requires a
certain company or program for verification).
Third-Party Food safety Audits require
preparation and planning, so a farmer must
familiarize themselves with the audit
requirements and implement the required
food safety practices in advance of an audit.
The following are links to some of the auditing
and/or their specific programs:
Harmonized GAP:
https://www.ams.usda.gov/services/auditing/gapghp/harmonized
Primus Auditing Ops:
https://primusauditingops.com/index.php/schem
e-menu-primusgap
Global G.A.P. local GAP Audit:
https://www.globalgap.org/uk_en/what-we-do/glo
balg.a.p.-certification/localg.a.p./
LGMA:
https://lgma.ca.gov/
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
15
Assessing the risks and implementing steps to
reduce the chance of contamination in each of
the above five areas and ensuring proper
traceability is what makes GAPs successful on
farms.
Third-Party Audits
Third-Party Food Safety Audits are not required
by FSMA or most smaller marketing channels
but can expand market opportunities for
farmers, larger buyers, such as grocery stores,
institutions, and wholesale distributors often
require farmers to pass a 3rd party food safety
audit, which verifies their on-farm food safety
practices. There are a number of third-party
auditing firms, each with a slightly different
program. You can request an audit from the
California Department of Food and Agriculture’s
Food Safety Audit Program or from a variety of
private companies that offer audits (e.g. Primus,
GlobalG.A.P., etc).
Additional Resources
Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF): https://caff.org/food-safety/ contains extensive tools,
templates, podcasts, and technical assistance ranging. Jump straight to helpful templates here
https://caff.org/food-safety/food-safety-plan-templates/ If just getting started, the farm risk assessment
and food safety plan templates are recommended.
UC Small Farm Food Safety resources for small farms in English, Spanish, Mandarin, Hmong, and lu
Mien: https://ucsmallfarmfoodsafety.ucdavis.edu/
Third-Party Food Safety Audit Guide from Carolina Farm Stewardship Association:
https://www.carolinafarmstewards.org/gaps-manual/
NSAC’s Food Safety Modernization Act Flow Chart:
https://sustainableagriculture.net/blog/updated-fsma-flowchart-2018/
 Community Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF)
16