1
Farmers’ Market Manual
Kristin Brennan
Contributors:
Sara Coblyn
Colleen O’Brien
Lincoln and Roxbury, Massachusetts
2
Copyright  2003 by The Food Project, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system, without the written permission of the publisher, The Food Project, Inc., except where permitted by
law.
(mailing address)
The Food Project, Inc.
P.O. Box 705
Lincoln, MA 01773
781-259-8621
(urban office)
The Food Project, Inc.
555 Dudley Street
Dorchester, MA 02124
617-442-1322
www. thefoodproject.org
email: outreach@thefoodproject.org
First Edition, February 2003
Designer: J.A. James
Editors: Carlos Christensen and J.A. James
Photographs: Greig Cranna, John Walker, and The Food Project Staff
3
Our Vision
Creating personal and social change
through sustainable agriculture.
Our Mission
The Food Project’s mission is to create
a thoughtful and productive community
of youth and adults from diverse backgrounds
who work together to build a sustainable food system.
Our community produces healthy food
for residents of the city and suburbs,
provides youth leadership opportunities,
and inspires and supports others
to create change in their own communities.
4
Preface
The Food Project started in 1991 in Lincoln, MA, a wealthy Boston suburb, on two and a half acres of
farmland. It was a small, noisy and energetic community of young people from very different races
and backgrounds, working side by side with adults growing and distributing food to the hungry.
In the process of growing food together, we created a community which bridges the city and suburb, is
respectful and productive, and models hope and purpose. We teach how one can love the land and its
bounty and how to care for and respect the rich matrix of life to which we all belong. In doing this we
as individuals and as a society grow and develop in healthy and sustainable ways.
We have grown since 1991 and now we farm on thirty-one acres and over two acres of remediated
land in Roxbury, a low-income neighborhood in Boston. We provide year-round stipended programs
for over one hundred youth, and with the additional help of 1,700 volunteers, grow 200,000 pounds of
food for fifteen shelters, our two farmers’ markets in low-income neighborhoods, and over two hundred Community Supported Agriculture shareholders. Since 1995 we have played an important role in
increasing productive green space and access to fresh food in Roxbury through remediating idle land,
and mentoring neighborhood gardeners in healthy food production. Food Project alumni play critical
roles in shaping program growth in enterprise, community organizing and education for urban gardeners, and building a national network to engage youth in local food system creation. Alumni interns are
agricultural apprentices, support our technology, pilot food enterprise with our chef, and play pivotal
roles in outreach and education. Alumni also serve as Food Project staff, trustees, and advisors.
The Food Project’s inspiring model addresses critical national issues: the need for race reconciliation,
the decline in local agriculture, a growing concern for the well being and productivity of youth, and
the need to create sustainable and healthy inner-city neighborhoods and metropolitan areas. The Food
Project addresses these issues with an integrative model that allows young people to develop communication, teamwork, and leadership skills, find meaningful employment, and make a connection to the
land and to the natural environment that will stay with them for a lifetime. Furthermore, by engaging
youth in social change, environmental protection, and the food system movement, we build the next
generation of civic leaders and practitioners.
Ahead of us are exciting challenges and opportunities. We are committed to expanding our local youth
programs and our impact on Boston’s metropolitan food system, while creating materials and workshops for those who wish to create similar programs around the country. This manual is one of many
publications we created to share our work with those committed to a similar vision.
Patricia Gray
Exective Director
The Food Project, Inc.
5
Acknowledgements
The farmers’ market is a critical piece of The Food Project’s broad vision to create a local food system
in Boston. Yet, the market is not just about the exchange of vegetables. It is a place where a community
gathers to share and celebrate both the fruits of city gardens and the gardeners that produce them. It is
a place to come together – to talk, laugh, and linger. Historically, societies that have engaged in vibrant
trading of crops in market places have been more likely to delve into the broader fruits of cultural
exchange – the sharing of languages, culture, religion, literature and world views. In years past, while
fruits and vegetables were being thrown from ships to wheelbarrows to be carted to homes, agreements were formed, wars waged, ideas exchanged, friendships made, minds stretched and perspectives changed forever. Societies were and are changed by the interactions that happen in the market
place – especially when these conversations are sparked by thoughtful and committed individuals with
differing perspectives but common visions. It is in this age-old market tradition, intermingled with
our modern vision to create personal and social change through sustainable agriculture, that The Food
Project runs farmers’ markets.
The writing of this manual has been as much a community endeavor as the market itself. First of all,
many staff, gardeners, and neighbors have worked together to create a market worth writing about.
The manual itself has changed as The Food Project has gained greater insight into the various aspects
of market management. It is with the amalgamation of all the lessons and insights of the past that we
offer this manual as a guide both for our own staff and for other markets throughout the country. Many
thanks to Colleen O’Brien and Sara Coblyn for the first two drafts of the manual and for their diligence
in creating a quality and community-oriented market. Thanks also to The Food Project farmers who
have provided beautiful produce for the Dudley Town Common market over the years: Don Zasada,
Martha Boyd, Carlos Gonzalez, Gideon Porth, Amanda Cather, and Danielle Andrews. A special appreciation goes to our neighbor gardeners who have sold their vegetables at the market: Sylvia Gaynor,
Honoria Correia, and Joe Freitas. Other farms have also helped guide our market to success as well:
Shartner Farm, Drumlin Farm, and Re-Vision House. The support from Liza Veras at DSNI has been
invaluable. Thanks, too, to the residents of the Dudley neighborhood, to our local businesses and organizations, and to the Parks and Recreation Department.
The mission of The Food Project’s market is to provide organic vegetables at an affordable price to the
community. Without financial support from our network of foundations and corporate sponsors, the
market could not exist. This manual is made possible through funding from the W.K. Kellogg Foundation.
Finally, a resounding applause for the youth that have, year after year, brought great energy, patience,
and care to the Dudley Town Common marketplace. Their investment in the food they have grown
and the interest they demonstrate for the residents of the city create an atmosphere that welcomes and
celebrates. It is this exuberance that births a magical place for food and fellowship.
Kristin Brennan
Dorchester, Massachusetts
April, 2002
6
7
Additional Resources from The Food Project
French Fries and the Food System:
A Year-Round Curriculum Connecting Youth with
Farming and Food—From Seed to Market to Table
This agricultural curriculum features powerful, original lessons written and developed by The
Food Project’s growers and educators. Organized by season, the material teaches youth how
to develop a deep understanding of and appreciation for the land and for local food systems.
Personal, first-hand stories of learning in the field complement each lesson and encourage further exploration. Lessons can be done both indoors and outside and can be easily adapted by
instructors working in school-based plots, urban food lots, community gardens, rural farms, and
environmental education programs.
Growing Together: A Guide for Building Inspired, Diverse and
Productive Youth Communities
This resource book is designed for communities of all ages andcan be used with many different
organizations. Written as a comprehensive, practical and lively guide, it shares The Food Project’s three-part model that encourages all members of a community to grow together through
meaningful work, shared standards, and interactive learning. The book describes the role of
meaningful work within communities, outlines a complete process of establishing and maintaining shared standards within a community, offers over 100 exercises that bring learning, reflection and energy to any program, provides tips for facilitating groups, processing activities and
building inclusion, and includes rich photographs and inspiring stories to complement the text.
Program Manuals
These manuals describe the nuts and bolts of running all areas of The Food Project, including:
the Summer Program, the Academic Year Program, the Volunteer Program, the Alumni Program, Farmers’ Markets, Rural Agriculture, and Urban Agriculture. Together, these resources
describe in detail the implementation and program management of The Food Project. These
manuals will assist those who want to develop similar work in their own communities.
D.I. R. T. : The Next Generation
This video is the story of a diverse group of teenagers who break through their stereotypes
about one another to become a close-knit community learning leadership, public speaking and
farming skills. The 22-minute video is a glimpse into the spirit of The Food Project from the
eyes, words and voices of the young people who have experienced the program. An ideal way
to learn more about The Food Project, this youth-produced video will also serve as a springboard for discussion about a model that is thoughtfully and creatively challenging youth to
build a better future for themselves and their communities.
Other Products:
T-Shirts
Mugs
Baseball Hats
For information on ordering these or any other publications by The Food Project, please contact
us at:
The Food Project, Inc.
Attn: Publications
P.O. Box 705
Lincoln MA 01773
Phone: 781-259-8621
Fax: 781-259-9659
e-mail: outreach@thefoodproject.org
www.thefoodproject.org
Table of Contents
Related Attachments
I. Introduction
Welcome 11
History of the Farmers’ Market 12 1
II. Planning
Create Your Plan 15
Market Permits 19 2,3,15
Equipment and Supplies 22 4,5
Finding a New Market Site 24 6
III. Outreach and Education
The Overall Marketing Plan 28 7,8,9,10,11
State & Federal Coupon Programs 36 12,13,14
Vendor Recruitment 40 15,16,17
Neighbor Gardeners 45
Special Community Outreach Projects 47 18,19
IV. Operations
Staffing the Market 52 11
Market Internship 57
Produce Availability and Pricing 61
The Register, Cash and Coupons 63
Summer Crew Worker Training 67 20,21
Setting Up and Taking down the Stand 72
Running the Market Smoothly 79
Events at the Market 84
Keeping Business Records 86 22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32
V. Evaluation
Completing Your Records 91
Analyzing the Market 91 33,25
The Marketplace 96
List of Attachments
1. Directions to the Market
2. Sample Permit Request
3. Sample Parking Request
4. Equipment Inventory Spreadsheet
5. Sample Bag Request
6. Sample Site Use Proposal
7. Trilingual Flyer
8. Spanish Flyer
9. Coupon Flyer
10. Sample Calendar Announcement
11. Sample PSA
12. WIC Director Letter
13. Follow Up WIC Letter
14. Market Poster
15. Sample Vendor Letter
16. Vendor Application and Guidelines
17. General Outreach Letter
18. Elder Information
19. School Flyer
20. Market Visit Question Sheet
21. Market Set-Up List
22. Market Sales Log (#1)
23. Market Sales Log (#2)
24. Market Sales Log (#3)
25. Market Accounting Sheet
26. Market Statistical Summary Spreadsheet
27. Market Receipt Spreadsheet
28. Statistic Spreadsheet for Lincoln Farm
29. Statistic Spreadsheet for Boston Lots
30. Market Donation Spreadsheet
31. Farm % Breakdown by Dollars Spreadsheet
32. Farm % Breakdown by Pounds Spreadsheet
33. Market Analysis Workshop
11
Introduction
• Welcome
• History of the Farmers’ Market
Welcome to The Food Project Farmers’ Market
By the time we bring the vegetables to the market, our knees are dirtied,
our fingers smell like basil, the backs of our necks are darkened, and our
hands are rough and callused. We don’t feel tired in the same way we
used to, in the late afternoon, after a day of fieldwork. It is nearing the
end of summer. The adrenaline has lasted from our morning activity,
when we pulled red peppers and eggplants gently from their plants, lifted
skinny carrots from their soft soil bed, snapped collard green leaves from
their hearty stems and gathered their huge leaves into bunches of ten,
winding a sturdy rubber band around their base. Our vegetables come
out of the box truck, stacked neatly in bright orange sunshine crates,
heavy with the weight of beets, corn, and potatoes. Onto long tables,
arranged in bushel baskets and steel tin buckets, the newly harvested
produce is guided into various categories – greens, roots, brassicas,
fruits and summer vegetables. Signs are raised, price boards are tied
to the sides of the tents, and the cash box is opened for business. Soon,
the bustling increases, the tables are surrounded by a crowd of people,
and the sound emerging from the scene is that of a marketplace of old,
overflowing with familiar and foreign languages, shouting out prices
and product names, pointing and gesturing, requesting and thanking. The
young people that work the market table respond to their customers with
care and precision. Two months ago they walked onto the land without any gardening experience but now they have pulled weeds, spread
compost, set up drip irrigation systems, and harvested vegetables. These
vegetables, their vegetables, are what they offer to the community that
surrounds the lively stand.
The Food Project has been participating in farmers’ markets throughout the Boston area since the organization’s founding in 1991. In 1996,
we began our own farmers’ market on the Dudley Town Common
in Roxbury, MA. The vision of the market was to create a lively and
colorful marketplace, where residents of the Boston area, regardless of
income, could purchase affordable, culturally-appropriate and freshlypicked organic produce for themselves and their families. Throughout
the years, the farmers’ market has lived into this vision. Vegetables, 
12
grown on The Food Project’s urban and suburban farms by teenagers
from diverse communities, are harvested, washed, and transported to
the farmers’ market site. Residents of the city purchase the fresh, delicious vegetables, and then witness their money cycled back through
the local economy through the purchase of seeds and soil amendments for the city land. Young people are at the heart of this activity
- weighing, bagging, and serving customers. While building skills in
math and customer service, the youth develop an understanding of
the management and running of a small business. At the end of the
day, the market is closed up and the surplus food is delivered to area
shelters. In a larger sense, the Dudley Town Common Farmers’ Market is one step along the way to the goal of a local food system where
food is grown, harvested, sold, and served all within the Boston area.
The History of The Food Project Farmers’ Market
In 1992, The Food Project opened its first youth-run farmers’ market
in the South End, a neighborhood just south of downtown Boston.
The youth who ran the market were from Lincoln, Roxbury, Mattapan, and Concord, and other towns in the metropolitan Boston area.
It was a simple stand with vegetables displayed in wicker baskets,
signs with brightly colored youth drawings of beets and carrots, a
cash box, a blue tarp, and smiling young people from the city and
suburbs of Boston. Through the farmers’ market, The Food Project
was participating in a street-side food business, where young people
could get a snapshot of food distribution that differed from large supermarkets and malls. In addition, youth from the suburbs were able
to get a taste of the life of the city.
Our market migrated between low-income communities around
Boston where we increased access to local food while spreading the
vision and mission of The Food Project. Yet, The Food Project was
interested in finding a permanent home for the farmers’ market. We
wanted to serve a need as well, providing for a neighborhood that
might have limited access to fresh, organic vegetables. A commitment
to one community became a central goal of The Food Project’s market.
From the beginning of the organization, The Food Project founder,
Ward Cheney, explored ways to build a truly local food system, impacting both youth and adults from different backgrounds, cultures
and economic situations. The process of creating a local system is
multifaceted and The Food Project knew that it was intimately dependent on a close connection to a particular community. The Food
Project identified the Dudley Street Neighborhood in Roxbury and
One cannot think well, live well, sleep
well, if one has not dined well.
Virginia Woolf
13
North Dorchester, MA as a place that held many of important features
that we valued. First of all, the neighborhood had a strong grassroots
community development organization, Dudley Street Neighborhood
Initiative (DSNI) that was supportive of The Food Project’s participation. The area was a low-income area with limited access to local,
organic fruits and vegetables and had a high rate of unemployment,
poverty and environmental and social degradation. The neighborhood housed a large proportion of open and abandoned land that
held the potential for growing food. In addition, the neighborhood
had a history of agriculture and was already spotted with gardens,
tended by immigrant residents who had rich agricultural backgrounds from around the world.
After committing to the neighborhood, The Food Project began to hire
young people from Dudley. At the same time, we identified vacant
land that could serve as a site for food production once it was cleaned
and remediated from contaminants. We found a location for a farmers’ market at the Dudley Town Common, a Parks and Recreation
space located at a major intersection for walking, busing, and car
commuting (See Attachment 1: Directions to the Market). Throughout this time, we cultivated partnerships with community organizations with similar interests and ideas about community and economic
development, which have been instrumental in communicating the
value of an open-air market to residents of Dudley. By 1995, we were
hiring 30% of our youth from the Dudley Neighborhood. We had
cleaned up and grown vegetables on a half-acre vacant lot on Langdon Street and solidified our permit for a permanent market site at
the Dudley Town Common. The solid relationships we had built with
DSNI and Nuestra Communidad, community development organizations interested in building a healthy economic, social and environmental atmosphere for their residents, helped us in the early stages of
success with the market.
Stabilizing our location in the Dudley community generated an incredible amount of momentum for our farmers’ market. Since 1996,
we have held the market at a consistent time and day. Customers rely
on our presence and know that rain or shine, The Food Project Market will take place. Over the years, other vendors have attended the
market—farmers and gardeners who have provided both character
and fresh products each week. Bob Schartner, a vegetable and fruit
grower attended the market for four years, bringing fresh corn, peaches and apples to excited customers each week from July to November.
Sylvia Gaynor, a Roxbury resident and gardener, has sold a special
variety of calaloo from her native Jamaica for over five years. Other
Attachment 1
14
growers (Drumlin Farm, Re-Vision House, Joe Freitas, and Honorio
Correia) from both the city and the suburbs, have come and gone over
the years.
In 1999, we began running an additional market on Tuesday in Codman Square, Dorchester, but soon realized that our youth felt less connected to this neighborhood because of its distance from Dudley. Still
wanting to increase access to local, organic vegetables, we decided
to run our Dudley Town Common market twice a week. We were
initially concerned that our revenue would stay the same, simply
splitting the current customer base in half. However, we improved
product sales at both markets with the added market. In addition, we
provided our young people with more opportunities to run the stand
throughout the season.
From the beginning, The Food Project wanted to create as diverse and
full a market as possible for our customers. Over the years, we have
sold organic gardening supplies, prepared foods, bread, honey, and
eggs at the market. We held a chef demonstration each Thursday and
invited several organizations to hand out materials, share important
health information, and entertain our customers. We ran a farmers’ market bus campaign that communicated the dates, locations
and times of our market, as well as celebrated the idea that the food
was grown locally and using sustainable practices, and planted and
harvested by youth. We developed bright and colorful banners, and
bought new tents and tables. We offered over 35 different kinds of
vegetables at the market, selling calabaza squash, collard greens, okra,
artichokes, and specialty hot peppers. We grossed nearly $19,000 at
the markets in 2001 and distributed over 35,000 pounds to customers who used cash or coupons they had to purchase the freshest food
in the area. We are proud of our market today because of the people
who have carried it along its journey to the Dudley Town Common.
Whether you are reading this manual to begin your own farmers’
market, to improve the one in which you already participate, or to
continue the tradition of running the market at The Food Project, you
are entering an exciting time in the history of open air markets and
The Food Project’s market.
Good customer service is key to a successful market. 
15
Planning
•	 Create Your Plan
•	 Market Permits
•	 Equipment and Supplies
•	 Finding a New Market Site
Create Your Plan
A detailed plan for a farmers’ market is an invaluable tool for guiding a successful and smooth market season. When establishing a new
market, it is important to consider the methods and strategies of wellrun farmers’ market to guide your own plan. There are several books
and resources available that offer practical steps and insight into
running a tight and smooth market. Speaking with market managers,
farmers, and market customers is valuable way to guarantee that all
details have been accounted for in your overall plan. If your market
has existed for several seasons or more, it is important to use your
own data to inform your market plan. Keeping records, notes, and
observations year to year creates useful resources for determining the
best aspects of your market and the elements that need to be worked
on.
At The Food Project, prior to the market season (specifically December and January), the Market Manager reviews the farmers’ market
analysis, sales records, quarterly reports from the previous season,
and current annual plan before setting out to achieve the goals for the
market season. The Food Project Farmers’ Market Analysis is produced by the youth during the fall and early winter and consists of a
six-part curriculum. The results produce both qualitative and quantitative results, including customer survey feedback, the salability of
particular vegetables, and the business skill development of youth.
The analysis report holds information on customer preferences and
trends over time in market revenue, vegetable popularity, and size of
customer base. Throughout the season, the Farmers’ Market Manager
keeps detailed sales records and these numbers can provide a guide
for vegetable needs and cash expectations. Quarterly Reports written
by past managers and Annual Plans exist both on computer and hard
files in management records and these provide an overview of market
goals, successes, and challenges.
Once the manager has obtained these documents and reviewed them
thoroughly, it is time to meet with the urban grower, the urban educators, and the program director to make decisions on start and end 
16
dates, educational initiatives, events, vegetable varieties for sale at the
market, and youth training. The next step is bringing the initial decisions to the Program and Production Team (growers, directors and
youth development staff), who will finalize the dates and logistics in
the context of the whole program.
Choosing the Dates of Operation
Deciding when to begin and end your farmers’ market can be challenging. The decision requires a sensitivity to spring and fall weather,
the knowledge of the growing season of various crops, a sense of
when farmers would be ready to sell their produce, and a sense of
the market potential during the times when less produce is available. Will your customer base keep coming for spinach, lettuces,
and radishes when there is no corn or tomatoes? You may want to
delay the start date, if your production plan includes only a few early
greens and beets, for example. Are the root vegetables available in the
fall popular enough to make it worth your time and energy to keep it
open through November?
At The Food Project, and in many spots in New England, we typically
do not start farmers’ markets until June, unless season extension is
used or transplants are a significant part of the market merchandise.
Since 2000, The Food Project has begun its market during the first
week of June since our urban grower built hoophouses that expanded
the early vegetable availability. On the other side, the hoophouses
and the warmer climate in the inner city of Boston allowed us to
extend the market until the beginning of November. Making decisions with both the growers and youth program staff allows you to
choose market dates depending on the diversity of the harvest and on
youth availability (to run the market). The urban grower is responsible for the production and distribution of vegetables grown in the
city and the rural grower is responsible for suburban production and
distribution, and both growers can provide essential information to
your decision-making process. Critical questions to ask are: What are
the growers’ plans for season extension? What number and variety
of vegetables makes for a diverse market? Do you plan to sell transplants and if so, when will they be ready?
Because of the relative warmth in the city, the urban lots provide all
the produce for the early June markets. By the third week in June, the
suburban farm begins to deliver produce to the market and continues
to do so throughout the summer and fall. A June market may offer 5-7 
17
different types of vegetables, including lettuce, salad greens, carrots,
beets, spinach, peas, and strawberries. Transplants are popular at
early spring markets because there are many gardeners in the area.
Talk with the Lincoln grower about offering transplants to sell at the
market. Extra transplants may be available or the manager could
gather the materials to start plants. Ask the grower in January for
advice and guidance about preparing transplants for the market.
Value-added products produced by The Food Project Kitchen, other
growers, or food artisans can supplement an early or late market
table. These products could include bread, baked goods, salsas, honey
or greenhouse tomatoes. In order to fill out the spring tables with
a diversity of products, talk to The Food Project’s kitchen manager
about ideas for items that could come from our kitchen. In addition,
contact people we have worked with in the past. Verrill Farm, Haley
House, and other local food artisans have wholesaled items to The
Food Project in the early spring and late fall, and sometimes throughout the season. Don’t be afraid to explore new ideas and products
based on your review of data and surveys. When considering new
options, however, keep in mind that additional products require planning and possible pick-up and distribution time.
Create an Outreach Plan
An outreach plan is essential to the success of any market. Traditional
forms of advertising are not always the most effective for generating
business since farmers’ markets are often attended as the result of
personal and informal word of mouth modes of communication. The
Food Project uses a variety of avenues to get the word out about our
market. The Farmers’ Market Manager is encouraged to take advantage of these established outreach paths as well as be creative about
generating interest in and business around the market.
As a first step to developing an outreach plan, we encourage you to
read this manual closely, focusing on the sections on marketing and
advertising. Use the sections to spend some time thinking about the
upcoming season. Draft a plan to communicate the value of the market to consumers. Make a list of the ways you might like to explore innovative outreach approaches. Contact representatives from the local
community about meetings or events where you can give presentations about the market. Ideas include:
The farmers’ market is full of hustle and
bustle on a summer day. 
18
•	 Conduct a presentation to the staff of a local WIC program (Women, Infants and Children coupon program) or nutrition center on
how to attract their constituents to the market. Many of these programs are housed in community action centers or health centers.
•	 Visit a local school and do an interactive presentation with students about the market. Hand out information about the market
that they can take home to their parents. In the past, The Food
Project has given coupons to kids and scheduled events at the
market to increase customer attendance.
•	 Plan a certain number of celebrations throughout the market
season. Hold one at the first market and one at the last market.
Highlight different vegetables throughout the season with samples of different varieties and recipes.
•	 Deliver flyers to local community centers, churches, offices and
clubs in the area and talk to staff about the market.
Hours of Operation
Choosing the hours of operation for a market is crucial. If the majority of the customer base will be composed of commuters or people on
9-5 working schedules, then the market needs to accommodate those
who are working during the day. At The Food Project, the market has
historically opened at 4:00 p.m. and closed at 7:00 p.m. We have found
that this time frame fits both the schedules for our youth development programs and the shopping habits of our customers. We are
strict with our opening and closing times. This highly structured approach benefits both the youth and our customers. Our young people
respond well to the consistent structure of the market activity because
it allows them to be intimately involved in the processes of setting up
and taking down the market site. Consistent time frames and expectations create an atmosphere where the youth can excel at market tasks.
In addition, our customers come to depend on us honoring the times
we say we are there.
There are some time adjustments due to the changing of the seasons.
As the autumn darkness comes earlier in the day, we often open the
market by 3:30 p.m., and close by 6:30 P.M. This ensures the safety of
our staff and youth. As these times change, it is important to inform
customers (using flyers and signs) before you shift the market hours
of operation, so that they can plan accordingly. 
19
Market Permits
Permitting requirements for farmers’ markets differ from site to site.
Depending on where your market is being held, there may be a site
permit required. In addition, depending on what products you will
sell at the market, it is also necessary to investigate food permits. As a
Market Manager, you are running a small food business that requires
attention to detail. While selling raw produce at a Farmers’ Market is
probably the most benign type of food business in terms of health and
safety regulations, make sure that the running of the stand follows
all pertinent health policies. It is important to be aware of the rules
governing farmers’ markets and stay updated as they may change.
Resources for Farmers’ Markets are found in the Department of Food
and Agriculture and the Department of Public Health.
Site Permit
The Food Project Market is held on public park land and requires a
permit from the City of Boston, Parks and Recreation Department. In
our case, the decision is made both by the city and by DSNI (Dudley
Street Neighborhood Initiative), a neighborhood organization that
holds eminent domain rights for the triangle area that includes the
Dudley Town Common. To account for possible delays during the
various steps of permitting, it is important to start the process by the
end of April or sooner. The steps for obtaining the permit are as follows:
•	 Request a letter of support for use of the site from
DSNI. The contact person at DSNI for park permits
then sends a letter directly to the Commissioner at the
Parks and Recreation Department.
•	 Send a letter of request to the Parks and Recreation
Department for use of the market site. Address the
letter to the Commissioner (See Attachment 2: Sample
Permit Request.).
•	 A formal application for site use will be sent to you.
The application will request that you submit proof of
insurance for staff, youth, and the site. Obtain a copy
of insurance from the Office Manager and submit it
with your application. In addition, hold on to a copy
of insurance to be held with you at the site at all times.
Attachment 2
The Food Project’s current market site is
at the Dudley Town Common.
20
•	 Call to follow up on your application, making sure that
all the materials were received and that the process is
moving along.
•	 Once you have obtained your permit, laminate it,
and place it in a safe, but accessible container that is
brought to and from the market site. It is imperative
that the permit is with you at all times when the market is open.
Parking Permits
Parking availability is an important resource for widening the customer base of any farmers’ market, but obtaining parking privileges
in an urban area is often a difficult task. The Food Project chose the
Dudley Town Common site in Roxbury because it was a major intersection with several bus interchanges and a lot of foot traffic. Therefore, our market is not dependent on our ability to accommodate
customers with cars. However, Dudley Street and Blue Hill Avenue
are commuter routes for many people driving to and from Boston for
work. Knowing that our customer base could be expanded by trying
to attract commuting drivers, we have investigated various parking
options for our market customers.
We have made several requests in the past to the Department of
Transportation for permission to use public parking lots during the
hours of our market operation (See Attachment 3: Sample Parking
Request) . However, permits from the City of Boston are difficult to
obtain because of the high demand for public parking in the business
storefront area. Another option is to request parking privileges from
private organizations and businesses in the area. In the past we have
requested use of the parking lot at St. Patrick’s Church (across from
the market site), but to date, our efforts have not been successful. The
Market Manager should continue to explore options like this as well
as others. Be Our Guest Catering Company, local schools, and other
city-owned lots may provide some public use of their lots. Market
coupons are a great way to barter use of privately owned space.
Scale Inspection
Accurate, consistent, and functioning scales are essential equipment
for a farmers’ market. The City of Boston, Inspectional Services Department, insures scales annually for all types of businesses, includAttachment 3
21
ing farmers’ markets. Before inspection, it is important to repair old
scales and buy new ones if needed. Due to constant handling, there
is a lot of wear and tear on farmers’ market scales. The most important thing, however, is that the scale is functioning and weighing
accurately. Therefore, a scale with broken glass can still be inspected
and used for the season. With that said, due to the cost of the inspection approval for each scale, limit the scales to what is needed for that
season.
Schedule an appointment to have your scales licensed with the Inspector (to be found in the 1010 Massachusetts Avenue complex).
Inquire about the cost per scale, since the inspection sticker fee is
likely to increase over time. Often, the Inspector will come to The
Food Project office or farm lot but be ready to bring the scales to 1010
Massachusetts Avenue if necessary.
Vendors’ Permits
The bigger and more diverse a farmers’ market, the more attractive it
will be to the public. Multiple vendors offering a variety of products
is an effective strategy for increasing the business and vitality of a
market. Having uniform and clear guidelines and agreements for the
vendors guarantees professionalism and efficiency at your market.
Necessary permits are part of the process of assuring commitment
and value. If you are entering into an already established farmers’
market, then the market manager will inform you of the requirements
for you to sell your product. However, if you are managing a new
farmers’ market, or continuing to manage an established market, it is
important to have guidelines and agreements for each of the vendors.
At The Food Project market, all vendors must have proof of insurance for their own businesses or farms. There may be exceptions to be
made for neighborhood gardeners who sell their own produce by our
side but any other food product must be made in an inspected commercial kitchen. Copies of food permits and insurance for each of the
vendors should be kept in the manager’s files to be brought out upon
the request of an inspector. We also require vendors to complete an
application to sell at our market (See Attachment 15: Vendor Application and Guidelines) and pay a small fee.
Temporary Food Services Permit
Fresh, uncut vegetables and fruits do not need a permit to be sold at
a farmers’ market. However, all other foods require permits to sell.
The Division of Health Inspections requires a temporary food service
Attachment 15
DIRT Crew Member Alex Gomes
weighing produce.
22
application for any food that is prepared on-site or off-site in a commercial or licensed residential kitchen. Requirements for open air,
prepared food distribution, may change each year. If a new product
is being researched to sell at the market, it is important to first look
at the permitting implications. In the past, we have obtained a permit from the Board of Health that allowed us to sell fresh bread and
honey. With the addition of The Food Project’s commercial kitchen
and the production of various foods and food products, the Market
Manager is responsible for ensuring permitting for all of the various
items to be included on the market table during the season.
In preparation for the recruiting or creating products for market,
review the history of The Food Project’s research into permits found
in Farmers’ Market files. Request updates on this information from
the Department of Food and Agriculture, or the Division of Food and
Drug at the Local Board of Health. Refer to the files on permitting
history. Call other farmers’ market managers or the Federation of
Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets to update and continue the research
process. The Board of Health will give full information on updated
health regulations.
Other Permits
Farmers’ Markets can expand in many different ways. Depending on
new initiatives that may develop within the organization, the market
manager should be ready to research any other permits required to
ensure the success of additional activities and products.
Equipment and Supplies
Equipment is an important part of any farmers’ market. Because
the market is a temporary stand, and depends on materials that are
handled often, it is important to care for the Farmers’ Market equipment properly and replace it when necessary. When choosing new
equipment, keep in mind the importance of mobility, durability, and
functionality for the market.
At The Food Project, the market manager keeps an inventory spreadsheet (see Attachment 4: Equipment Inventory Spreadsheet). The
spreadsheet is the master list of all the equipment for the farmers’
market stand. The list includes information on the number of items,
the optimal number needed, the condition of each of the materials, and maintenance recommendations. An inventory list helps the
manager to keep on top of all the equipment and replace materials
when needed. Consult the previous year’s inventory list during early
Attachment 4
Keeping track of sales and customers
is a challenging task during a busy
market.
23
March. Some equipment will need to be repaired and some replaced.
Allow time for ordering and repairing and keep in mind that farmers’
markets throughout the area will be doing inventory and ordering
during the same months and might delay or limit items that you need.
Some things to consider when evaluating your equipment needs:
•	 Budget. Check the budget for Equipment and Supplies allocations
before you order anything new.
•	 Inventory. Check the actual supplies in the shed for what you can
fix and what should be replaced.
•	 Donations. Many organizations or businesses are interested in
donating to causes they are interested in. Review the following
section on donations to brainstorm on sources for some of your
materials and equipment for the season.
•	 Suppliers. Consult the organizations database in the computer for
the Farmers’ Market vendors. In the notes field of the database,
do a find for “FM Supplier” and sort through records for the appropriate supplier.
•	 Consumable items. Consumable items can quickly drop to critically low numbers, so keep track of them. These include pens,
receipt pads, markers, produce bags, extra paper for signs, and
chalk. When chefs visit and cook at the market, it is important to
replenish plates, cups, forks and knives during the season.
•	 Tools. Make sure you have the necessary tools to fix equipment
that may break during the season. Tools can also include duct
tape, tent parts, and bungee cords.
•	 Final Inventory. At the end of the market season, inventory all
market items and revise the inventory spreadsheet accordingly.
This should also include a general budget estimate for repair or
replacement of broken equipment.
Donations
Donations are an effective way to keep supplies up and costs down
for a farmers’ market. It is also a way to include community organizations, businesses, and individuals in the market. Many local people 
24
and businesses are interested and happy to help a worthy cause and
they only need to be approached with a request.
At The Food Project, we rely heavily on donations for consumable
as well as non-consumable items in order to keep our market costs
down. The market manager should be guided by the funding team
on how to request and track in-kind donations. Ask other staff members in the organization for suggestions about requesting donations.
All in all, the most effective approach is to be direct and clear in your
request. Make sure you have the specifics about what you want and
need. Have details on hand including numbers, type, style, and size.
It is best to overestimate as far as number, as there can always be
overstocking for the next season. Be sure to document each donation
in the database, so that other staff will be informed that a certain business has been contacted for donations. In addition, send a thank you
note expressing our gratitude and recognizing the importance of local
support for the work we do.
There are many small and larger items needed for the market that
could be easily spared by businesses while significantly reducing
market costs. Be creative and active in seeking out donations. Over
the years, The Food Project has benefited greatly through generous
donations. We have received discounts from EZ Up Tent Company,
which has allowed us to improve the infrastructure of our market.
Local and national supermarket chains are often willing to donate
plastic bags (produce and handle) to our market (see Attachment 5:
Sample Bag Request). The produce managers at Bread & Circus and
the Stop & Shops in Jamaica Plain and Dorchester have all donated
bags to our market. Products can also be donated. We received
a donation of ten cases of organic macaroni and cheese from Annie’s Homegrown of Vermont to sell at our market. Not only did the
macaroni and cheese bring in some extra revenue, it was very popular
among customers and exposed people to a healthy, local, organic option for a quick dinner or lunch.
Finding a New Market Site
Locating and establishing a new market at an additional site is not an
easy task. There are many elements and details to consider and often
these considerations are complex and multifaceted. Fortunately, The
Food Project has only needed to do this on a few occasions because it
can be a drain on money, staff, and resources. But we realize that in
the evolution of any business, a new market site may become necesAttachment 5
25
sary. The action to relocate a market or start a new one is often made
during the annual planning process and by the whole staff. Review
your annual plan to determine the plan for locating your markets.
If you are starting a new market, location should be of primary concern. The location of your site can be the make or break of your success as a business. Consider certain factors for site location:
	 •	 Visibility
	 •	 Foot traffic, public and private parking (preferably free) and
public transportation characteristics
	 •	 Other fresh-food related competition in the area
	 •	 Community’s desire for open, public market
	 •	 Economics of residents and employees in the area
	 •	 Presence of peer organizations who can actively support,
promote, or publicly celebrate your efforts
	 •	 Aesthetics of the site
	 •	 Convenience to program and to customers
	 •	 Adherence to The Food Project’s mission
It is best to investigate the characteristics of your proposed market site
by talking with people in that area of town. Ask yourself and other
staff members, concerned citizens, and leaders in peer organizations
the following questions:
•	 Can you see the market from the bus or from office windows?
•	 Is it tucked away or on the street side?
•	 Do potential customers live and work in the area?
•	 Do potential customers stop at the site to change buses or pass
through your area on their way home or to work?
•	 Is it convenient for them to stop in their cars or shop and then
hop on the next bus?
•	 What other organizations provide a similar product to residents and area employees?
•	 Will you be in competition? Are you a niche market for these
items?
•	 What kind of relationship do you want to have with area businesses including those that you are not in direct competition
with?
•	 Are your customers higher income or lower income or is there
a mix?
•	 Is there a business association you can join to legitimize your
presence in this new place?
Trying out a new market site. 
26
The Food Project is a non-profit organization with a social mission
(see the first pages of the manual). Our primary commitment at the
markets is to make healthy, affordable, and organic produce available
to our neighbors and constituents who need it. Although we do seek
to cover as many of our costs as possible, our markets are not driven
by profit. We seek to serve people according to our vision. Therefore,
when considering an addition site location for a market, refer to The
Food Project mission to identify how it fulfills our mission.
Once you have decided on a potential location and purpose of a new
market, go to leaders and public officials in the area to assess the
logistics of introducing a farmers’ market in that community. When
starting a market, it is crucial to gain the support of many entities
and individuals within that community. These supporters will help
to make marketing strategies and outreach ideas a reality. It is also
likely that these organizations may become potential funders or financial supporters.
Site Proposals
In 1999, a search was done to locate an additional market site in
Roxbury and Dorchester. If you are attempting to locate another site,
review any history of this type so as not to redouble that effort (see
Attachment 6: Sample Site Use Proposal). It might make sense to call
some of the places already approached to see if their availability has
changed.
Steps in developing a site proposal:
•	 Identify who has ownership of the site you are interested in.
•	 Identify key community organizations, local elected officials, and
individuals in the community who you could name as supporters
and approach them with the idea of the market.
•	 Assess the needs of this community for a farmers’ market.
•	 If your assessment identifies a need, craft a proposal for the benefits this market will bring to the community.
•	 Gather support letters and detail the specifics of the needs for the
market including site use, electricity, parking needs, space needs,
and so on. The details of this proposal will depend on the needs
of the particular organization to which you are applying. They
may also ask you to create a map that shows how you will use the
area for the market in order to see if it will impinge on pedestrian
or other use.
Attachment 6
Standing proudly behind their market
set up, a crew from the Summer Youth
Program is ready to receive the day’s
customers. 
27
•	 When dealing with a city entity or bureaucracy, follow up is crucial. Be prepared to make several calls without getting any calls
back. Your persistence will be the key to your success.
Once you have obtained a new market site, gather information on
your potential customers. You may have already gleaned some information through your research in obtaining the site. It is helpful to
know the ethnic and income breakdowns for the area surrounding the
market site. Market surveys are beneficial to determine the types of
products the community would be interested in seeing at the market.
You may be able to work with a community- based organization to get
this done. The surveys can serve as a marketing tool. Try partnering
with a couple of organizations that expressed support for the market
and hold a community wide meeting to inform residents about the
upcoming market and get their feedback.
Kristin Brennan, former Farmers’ Market
Manager in the middle of a typical
market. 
28
Outreach and Education
• The Overall Marketing Plan
• State and Federal Coupon Programs
• Vendor Recruitment
• Neighbor Gardeners
• Special Community Outreach Programs
The Overall Marketing Plan
A market’s success from year to year is due to a great extent on how
well its value is communicated to the outside world, and especially to
target customers. Through designing a diverse and organized marketing plan, which can be based on the analysis of service and sales
from previous seasons, the market can respond directly to the community’s needs and desires.
Every year at The Food Project, we develop an extensive plan for
letting others know about the resource of health, food, and education that the market provides. Part of the success we have found in
integrating young people into the market comes from the fact that the
market is a legitimate business and the goal is to please the customers
with a quality product that they see as desirable. Knowing the importance of the work they are doing, the youth respond by giving high
quality customer service and the customers trust the inherent value of
the product.
Understanding the following concepts will help you design an effective communication plan for your farmers’ market:
1. Know and Trust Your Product
Before communicating the true value of the market to a potential customer base, it is important to know and trust your product. The produce delivered from the farms to the markets each week is a trusted,
quality product. The Food Project’s growers are well-informed about
the needs and desires of the community and each grower is skilled
at growing the produce requested by the customers. When selling,
it is important that the manager, the youth, and other staff are fully
aware of the names and culinary uses of all the products at the market. Knowing in advance what will be available encourages loyal
customers to return for certain items. You will feel more capable as
a marketer if you can provide customers with a reason to shop week
after week.
Produce for the farmers’ market comes
from city lots and the farm in Lincoln,
MA. 
29
2. Understand Niche Marketing
There are many reasons why a person might visit and shop at a
certain farmers’ market – convenience, price, variety, organics, sustainability, and availability. One way to attract customers is through
a niche product, something hard to find but popular among people
who live in the area. Because the Dudley Town Common Market is
located in a culturally diverse community, The Food Project has the
opportunity to offer niche market products that customers may not be
able to find in the grocery store. Another aspect of the niche product that a farmers’ market offers is the aspect of “fresh” or “organic”
which is not readily or abundantly available in urban supermarkets.
A survey held year to year on customers’ product wants can offer a
helpful guide for market managers and growers. At The Food Project,
the end of the season annual Farmers’ Market Analysis offers some
insight into the desires of the customers, but it might not help you
to gauge the desires of the people who are not attending the market. Obtaining the input of non-customers can be done through a
neighborhood door to door survey, speaking to a local nutritionist, or
visiting a health center that may indicate what kinds of products are
desired by the community but are not found in other local markets.
3. Location as Key
As has already been discussed, location for a farmers’ market is key
to its success. Having a visible site for passersby to stop and investigate the market is a significant marketing strategy. The longevity of a
market’s existence also ends up being its own outreach method. The
strength of the Dudley Town Common Market is that it has been situated in the same place for five years and customers have come to rely
on its presence there each year. Dudley Town Common, a park space
situated at the intersection of five streets, is a place where folks come
to shop for their stereos, attend church meetings, eat pizza and subs,
and change bus lines. Because the market is at the hub of all of this
activity, we are sure that many people learn about the market simply
by passing it.
4. Communication with Your Customer Base
Developing a solid communication plan may be the key to reaching
customers who are not currently shopping at the market. Communication should also be geared to remind customers who have shopped
at the market in the past, but have forgotten when the season begins,
or the kinds of products they can expect to buy. As you design methods for targeting potential customers, be cognizant of the following
consumer attitudes and behaviors:
30
•	 Most of your customers will come from within a three-mile
radius of the market.
•	 People need to be reminded at least three times of the market,
whether it be through verbal or visual cues.
•	 Each potential customer receives relevant information in their
own way, determined by the activity and events of their days.
The key to reaching customers is in identifying these life patterns and announcing the market in places and in forms of
communication that people are accustomed to. The best bet is
to employ a variety of methods, places, and forms.
5. Market the Mission of the Organization
The Food Project Farmers’ Market is not only a business. It is also a
training ground for youth focused around service, community involvement, local food systems, and job preparation. The market is
a place to share with others the value of buying and eating locally
grown organic produce. The farmers’ market can offer a model for
how an urban community that has suffered environmental and social
degradation due to poverty, misuse of resources, and neglect from
the city government can celebrate the local resources of people, food,
health, and land. The market manager’s task is to communicate The
Food Project’s mission in every way possible – to the youth, the community, and the customers. Accepting federal and state coupons is
one way to bring customers into your mission but there are many
other ways that the market demonstrates the values and vision of a
vibrant, local food system made up of healthy, nutritious farm goods.
Methods of Communicating with
Potential Customers
There are various ways to reach out to potential farmers’ market customers. Be creative in your approach and methods. When preparing
your marketing plan, take into account that the message and the messenger are equally important. Word of mouth can be more effective
than even the most polished marketing schemes, so consider developing networks of customers and neighbors to spread the word to family, friends, and community members through your loyal supporters.
Remember that there is a wealth of free advertisement available, especially for non-profits. To guide your process, refer to the past year’s
Market Analysis to guide your outreach and marketing strategies.
Consider the following advertisement methods used by The Food Project in the past as you design and implement your advertisement plan.
Expand this list as you proceed since it is by no means comprehensive.
A customer buying fresh produce for that
night’s dinner.
31
Local Organizations
The Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative (DSNI)
The Food Project has benefited greatly through the peer relationship
with the local neighborhood organization, Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative. DSNI has an incredible ability to communicate with
and mobilize residents for a cause. In addition to being very supportive of The Food Project’s work with local teenagers, DSNI also
views the market as a model for economic sustainability. In the past,
The Food Project has advertised in several of DSNI’s monthly publications. If you are interested in doing this, inquire to the publications
coordinator at DSNI. At times, there has been a small fee for this
service.
Merchants Associations
Merchants Associations exist to support the local economy. Member- ship in the local merchants association will provide you with
resources and support as you continue to build and communicate the
value of the farmers’ market. Membership in the association legitimizes your business with other storefront operators, even though you
are a seasonal farm stand. Associations are often connected to one
another and membership in one would guarantee exposure to other
groups throughout the Boston area. Begin by contacting all associations within a three to five square mile area and inform them about
the market. If possible, attend merchant association meetings to share
the benefits of the market with their members. The farmers’ market
has the potential to stimulate business in the area and be stimulated
by others’efforts in advertising. Membership and information sharing
in the business community will help to sustain the market in the long
run.
Local Businesses
The Food Project relies on local businesses to provide us with the support we need to spread the word about the market. Each May, Food
Project staff and youth request space in store windows for large posters that advertise the market. Many businesses agree to give counter
space to our flyers as well, so that when people come in to eat or to
buy, they can take an advertisement home with them. When talking
with the businesses about advertising, we also use this time to check
in with business owners to air any issues they may have with the
market. 
32
“We have great relationships with the businesses across the street
from the market site. We often give them discounts on produce
during the season and sometimes we donate extra produce, when it
does not sell. We check in with business owners at the beginning
and during the middle of the season to air any issues they may have
with the market. The couple that owns Tim’s Pizzas has occasionally
bought produce (lettuce, peppers, and tomatoes) and sometimes gets
a donation. On countless occasions, we have borrowed a tool or two
from the mechanic shop, when a tent or a table breaks. We rely on
these relationships to keep our business going and growing. I believe
they appreciate our presence in the neighborhood. “
Neighbors and Resident Groups
In Roxbury and Dorchester, residents live very close to each other.
Many were born in different countries and therefore, different languages are spoken in the area. In several ways, the neighborhood
is very active and involved in planning for their future. With this
type of activity, often the primary method for spreading the news is
by word of mouth. Door-to-door organizing is a great way to speak
directly with a potential customer and get them to speak with each
other about the food they buy each week at the market. Involve The
Food Project youth in distributing flyers in the late spring and until
the end of the harvest in October. (See Attachment 7: Trilingual Flyer,
Attachment 8: Spanish Flyer, Attachment 9: Coupon Flyer). Youth
find this energizing and understand how it fits into the bigger picture
of the business. Because many residents do not speak or read English, it is essential that you find a young person who can translate the
message to the Cape Verdean and Spanish speaking population in the
neighborhood.
Collaborate with other Food Project staff as the season nears, to see
if there are plans to organize youth in other surveying projects in
the neighborhood. Once you have a captured audience at the door,
it is easy to share information about the market. We often hand out
coupons to folks who have not heard about the market, as a way to
encourage them to come and buy vegetables.
Community Organizations
Any one community may contain hundreds of formal and informal
associations or groups that get together for a common purpose. The
Food Project has an extensive database of peer organizations that may
disseminate information about the market. Community Development
Corporations (CDCs) keep lists of associations and may be able to
supply you with contact information for the groups. You may want
Attachment 7
Attachment 8
Attachment 9
Young people from The Food Project
conducting a workshop on one of the
city lots. 
33
to form your own resident advisory group to plan the future of the
market. We have organized such groups in the past but they have dissolved once the season ends. If you decide to go this route, remember
to choose people who are leaders in the community and have energy
to attend meetings when scheduled. Tasks for the group may include:
organizing a market event, bringing several friends to the market each
week, recruiting gardeners to sell at the market, or volunteering to
translate for customers at the market.
Government Representatives
Every year the Department of Food, Agriculture and Markets publishes a list of farmers’ markets in Boston and around Massachusetts.
The Food Project Farmers’ Market is typically listed as a result of our
application to accept federal and state food coupons, but to ensure a
proper listing, contact the director of market advertising at the department.
Legislators and local representatives love to learn about local events
that positively impact the social, environmental, and economic atmosphere of a community. We have had incredible success in the past
inviting politicians to the market and typically do so, in August and
September, when youth involvement is high and the vegetables are
big, colorful, and abundant.
Press and Other Media
Community Newspapers
Residents in Roxbury and Dorchester rely on community newspapers
for reliable, relevant, and interesting local news. Be sure to coordinate
your efforts with the Public Outreach Coordinator, so that you are not
doubling efforts to advertise the market. Review previous advertisement efforts in Food Project files to assess their success and consult
the Farmers’ Market Analysis to plan for more appropriate advertisement efforts.
Community newspapers boast comprehensive calendar listings. The
Dorchester News reliably posts Food Project advertisement in the
“Community News” section of the paper. (See Attachment 10: Sample Calendar Announcement.) Other community newspapers have
similar approaches to communicating local events. Although news
reporters come and go, it is essential to find a champion at the newspapers, who knows the work of The Food Project and can promote us
from within. In the least, know the name of the person who is responsible for posting the advertisements. When writing an announcement
for the market or for other related events, include the location, brief
Attachment 10
34
directions to the site, days and hours of operation, and the products
sold. Jazz up the advertisement by using words like fresh, convenient, and affordable. You want to be honest and at the same time,
hook your potential customers.
Radio and Cable News
Communicate your interest in a radio address or cable news slot to
The Food Project’s Public Outreach Coordinator. They will advise
you on the processes for communicating this way. Public Service
Announcements (PSA) are effective ways to reach potential customers and youth with solid public speaking skills and/or language
fluency may be able to communicate with customers difficult to reach
through traditional, English-based news medium (i.e. Spanish or
Cape Verdean programming). (See Attachment 11: Sample PSA.)
Food Project Efforts
Mailings
Reaching people through the mail can be an effective method of
reaching former customers or people you know through other activities and connections. At The Food Project, as we continue to develop
contacts in the Dorchester and Roxbury area, our database becomes
an important resource for communicating the value of the market. Do
a general mailing to neighborhood residents by zip code within a five
square mile radius of the market site. Include market advertisement
in other organizational mailings that go out to potential customers.
These mailings may reach people who work in the area and can shop
at the market before heading back to their own community.
Food Project postcards (containing photos of young people holding
vegetables or working in the fields) can provide great incentive for a
resident to attend the market. A message that states the dates, times,
and locations of the market may be enough to increase participation
in the market.
The Food Project produces many publications and newsletters that
can post an advertisement for the market. The communication committee, an internal Food Project working group, sets forth an annual
timeline for organizational communication. Request attendance at a
meeting early in the year to plan for space in an upcoming newsletter. Food Project mailings that are appropriate for market advertising
include:
Attachment 11
The place to improve the world is first in
one’s own heart and head and hands,
and then work outward from there.
 Robert Pirsig 
35
•	 Organizational newsletter
•	 Alumni newsletter
•	 CSA newsletter and information
•	 Annual appeal
•	 Mailings to volunteers
•	 Board correspondence
Consider hooking potential market customers through the issuance
of a Food Project Farmers’ Market coupon. You may decide to print
the coupon in a newsletter or just distribute when surveying doorto-door. Consult your budget and decide how many coupons you
would like to print for the season. Redemption has historically been
low, but this may change as people learn more about the market.
Banners and Sandwich Boards
Big, colorful, eye catching signs are essential for an outdoor market.
The Food Project owns several sandwich boards and banners that are
used on the day of the market. They can be found in the supply bins
stored in the sheds. The signs are placed along both Blue Hill Avenue
and Dudley Street and are effective for folks driving cars or riding
the bus. The banner is usually hung up below the clock tower facing
Boston. Design other signs for the market itself to draw people’s attention to the display. These items may need maintenance from year
to year, but will be long lasting, if taken care of by youth and staff.
When you offer a special on one of the products at the market, let
your customers know. Cardboard is hard to display unless you have
a firm structure to post it on. Dry erase boards or chalkboards may
serve the purpose of showcasing temporary sales.
Permanent signage is optimal for a farmers’ market. At The Food
Project, efforts have been made to establish permanent signage for
the market site, which in Boston is a very difficult thing to do. Several years ago, there was a near success story for permanent market
signage. The farmers’ market manager established a relationship with
the Department of Neighborhood Development (DND) to design and
print banners for the area surrounding the market. For a variety of
reasons, the pole banners were printed and never hung up. Continue
to connect with DND about pole banners as you may find a champion
in the department, who is willing to go the extra mile to make things
happen. Be persistent with these efforts, as it is often just a matter of
talking with a voice and not voicemail.
The Food Project’s Farmers’ Market
serves over 300 people each day it is
open. 
36
Paid Advertising
Word of mouth, on site signage, community newspapers, and radio
spots will not hit everyone. If you have resources available to you, it
is good to consider paid advertisements to reach a clientele that less
prominent methods will not reach.
In 1998, the Environmental Protection Agency funded the Food Project to design and implement a public media campaign to discourage
the use of pesticides in urban gardens. This effort included money
to pay for advertisement about this issue, so that we could reach a
broader audience with the message. We chose to post two color, bilingual signs on MBTA bus and transit lines in the area, encouraging the
purchase of our fresh, local, organically grown vegetables. A significant amount of money was designated to design, print, and post these
signs for six weeks. Although it is difficult to quantify the success of
these efforts, we feel that purchasing advertisement space was worth
the money, and in the least, complemented our other marketing efforts.
State and Federal Coupon Programs
“I will miss running the Farmers’ Market because it is fun to stay late
and hang out with your friends while helping out the community. It
is satisfying to see that people can get locally and organically grown
vegetables for a cheaper price. You know that you are really helping the less fortunate when you see people smiling because of all the
things they can get with their Farmers’ Market coupons and WIC
coupons.”
- Shatara Francisco, Summer Program Crew Member, 2001
Farmers’ Market Coupons
The United States Department of Agriculture has been sponsoring the
dispersal of farmers’ market coupons as a way to boost the vitality of
farmers’ markets and to heighten food security in low-income neighborhoods. These coupons, given out to low-income mothers, elders in
the community, and others, provide a critical resource for both farmers and families. The Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program (FMNP)
was established by Congress in July 1992 as a supplemental source
of food income for the more general Women, Infants and Children’s
(WIC) Program, a federal program which allocates several million
dollars each year to mothers who meet low-income guidelines, are
pregnant, breast-feeding, and/or have children under the age of five.
37
The FMNP was passed by Congress to accomplish two main goals:
1. To provide fresh, nutritious, unprepared foods (such as fruits
and vegetables) from farmers’ markets to women, infants, and
children who are nutritionally at risk.
2. To expand the awareness and use of farmers’ markets by consumers.
In the neighborhood surrounding The Food Project’s Farmers’ Market, many residents meet federal guidelines for “low-income” and are
eligible to receive services through state and federal food assistance
programs. This assistance often comes in the form of nutrition education resources and services, health screening, and supplemental nutritious food. WIC (Women, Infants and Children) is a federal program
that provides a range of nutritional services for families including
nutrition education and breastfeeding support services. Their main
program is distribution of WIC coupons which are provided to Massachusetts residents who are pregnant or have children under five
years old and meet specified income guidelines. People who are
accepted into the program receive several coupons (valued at $2.50
each) designated for the purchase of “Fresh Fruits and Vegetables.”
The WIC Program provides a directory of farmers’ markets in Boston
and tips for shopping at the markets.
The coupons are distributed through WIC Program offices or neighborhood health centers. There are specific coupons issued for farmers’ markets and they should not be confused with the standard WIC
supermarket coupons. Each coupon specifies which products can
be purchased with them. In the case of farmers’ market coupons,
they are appropriate for the purchase of fruit, vegetables, herbs, and
flowers. However, it is important to check the restrictions each year
since they are bound to be slightly altered. Unlike the supermarket
coupons, the farmers’ market coupons do not need to be signed by
the individual. It is important to note that change cannot be given for
coupons.
The Food Project’s Farmers’ Market would not be able to serve the
community as well without the WIC Farmers’ Market Coupon program. Each year, approximately 60% of total sales at the market come
in the form of WIC Coupons. Our collaborations with WIC centers are
crucial because they represent our largest customer base. Connecting with WIC representatives in health centers is an effective method
for reaching out to coupon recipients so that the can exchange their
coupons for fresh, local vegetables. WIC Directors have allowed us
to participate in WIC trainings and presentations for both the health
center staff and the recipients. We have a comprehensive list of WIC 
38
Directors in our database and examples of letters offering presentations and nutrition trainings to staff and recipients in market files.
The market manager should focus on deepening these existing relationships by contacting WIC directors closest to our market by letter
and phone reminding them of our presence and offering our services.
(See Attachment 12: WIC Director Letter.)
Other Coupon Programs
“This new initiative encourages low-income seniors to improve their diets,
while helping America’s family farmers increase their markets for locallygrown fruits and vegetables.” – Dan Glickman, Former USDA Secretary
of Agriculture, 2001
The Department of Food and Agriculture (DFA) has two other coupon
programs. One is the Seniors Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program
(SFMNP), which was piloted in 2001. The coupons were established
under the USDA’s Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC) and makes
grants to States and Indian tribal governments to provide coupons to
low-income seniors that may be exchanged for eligible foods at farmers’ markets, roadside stands, and community supported agriculture
programs. Like the WIC coupon program, the SFMNP seeks to:
1. provide resources in the form of fresh, nutritious, unprepared,
locally grown fruits, vegetables, and herbs from farmers’ markets to low-income seniors
2. increase domestic consumption of agricultural commodities
by expanding or aiding in the expansion of farmers’ markets
3. develop or aid in development of new and additional farmers’
markets
Other coupons are directed toward low-income residents who are not
women with young children or elders. These coupons can be picked
up through local community centers. The elder and community
center coupons do not hold the same restrictions as the WIC coupons
but instead allow for a greater diversity of purchasing than the WIC
coupons do, covering baked goods, honey, meats, and dairy in addition to fruits and vegetables.
Information about the coupon program can be found from the Department of Food and Agriculture, which publishes extensive inforAttachment 12
39
mation about farmers’ markets on their web site and in their publications. At The Food Project, it is important for the market manager to
have an understanding of the coupon programs since they make up
such a large percentage of our revenue. Each year, the funding for
the coupon programs comes up for renewal. Because of budgetary
cuts for FY2002, the coupon program is being reduced. Since The
Food Project receives over 60% of its revenue through the coupons,
this funding reduction will be felt at the Dudley Town Common Market.
Farmers’ Market Coupon Redemption and Outreach
In order to redeem the market coupons, you must become an approved market through the Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’
Markets. The applications are distributed to markets in April, but
you may want to call to verify the timeline with them, so that you
are ready to redeem coupons beginning in June. The application is
accompanied by a list of requirements for authorization to redeem all
food assistance coupons. Read over the paperwork and identify updated guidelines. Information on coupon redemption is found later in
this manual, under the Operations Section.
Below, there is a checklist of steps that suggest the way to conduct
outreach to local WIC and community centers about the farmers’
market. Contact the Massachusetts Department of Agriculture with
questions and send away for an application for coupon redemption
from the Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets.
Here is a checklist of steps to take in your outreach to local WIC centers:
•	 By the end of April, craft a letter to WIC directors reminding them
of the upcoming Farmers’ Market season and offering any outreach services (see Attachment 12: WIC Director Letter).
•	 In the organization Database, in the “Our Organizations Function” field, locate all “FM Health Contacts.” This will give you a
working list of people who can be contacted in person, phone, or
mailing.
•	 Send this letter to both WIC Directors as well as general health
organizations notifying them of the coming market season. It
may seem early in the season, but it is good to get people thinking
about the market and whether they would like to schedule some
presentations with our young people during the spring.
Attachment 12
Young people do a variety of tasks--
selling, stocking, bagging, and helping
customers. 
40
•	 Follow the letter up with phone calls introducing yourself and
checking if the director has any interest in having us give a presentation to their staff or constituents or for any other collaboration.
•	 Farmers’ Market coupons are distributed once a month, beginning
in June and the final distribution is in August. The Department
of Food and Agriculture will send you a notice letting you know
when coupon distribution will begin. A few weeks before the first
market send another mailing to “FM Health Contacts” which are
listed in the database. It should include a letter announcing the
dates and times of the market, between 50-100 flyers (1/3 of horizontal 8 1/2" by 11") to be included in the recipients’ envelope,
and several posters for a bulletin board in the health center (see
Attachment 13: Follow Up WIC Letter and Attachment 14: Market
Poster).
•	 You may want to do another mailing at the end of July to remind
recipients and health center staff of the market calendar.
Note: Neighbor gardeners are not likely to be certified to receive
farmers’ market coupons and exchange them for cash with the DFA.
Yet, many customers come prepared only to use their coupons for
purchase. In the past, we have made agreements with neighbor gardeners that we will give them the cash value of the coupons that they
collect. Then we simply redeem their coupons along with our own. It
does not cost us anything to add their coupons to our stack and send
them in. Yet, the exchange enables them to offer their produce to anyone who comes to the market.
Vendor Recruitment
Lively, full and diverse farmers’ markets have the best chance of attracting a steady stream of customers. Farmers’ markets in the northeast cannot easily match the one-stop shopping that is so appealing
to people about supermarkets, but we can continue to provide fresher
and affordable products to consumers. Managing a farmers’ market
means recruiting vegetable farmers, fruit growers, food artisans, or
other product stands to the market site. Seek out a variety of local
products and materials. Try to bring in vendors that offer products
that do not overlap with one another so that each vendor has his or
her own special niche.
Attachment 13
Attachment 14
41
The two main categories for vendors are established by the state: food
and non-food. State permits for vendors are given out according to
various requirements and restrictions for each category. It is helpful
to organize them into these categories because different recruitment
methods and permitting needs are required for selling different types
of products. Non-food vendors including artists and artisans, are
becoming more popular at farmers’ markets. They attract customers looking to buy gifts for friends or to purchase organic gardening
products. Additionally, farmers’ markets do not need to be simply focused on selling food or non-food products to customers. Education
and information tables provide the community with a service that will
attract customers for different reasons. At The Food Project, we enhance sales for all vendors by inviting nutritionists and chefs to share
nutritional information or to demonstrate healthy cooking methods.
Food Vendors
Attracting food vendors to a farmers’ market holds incredible opportunities and several challenges for a market manager. At The Food
Project, we have actively recruited farmers and gardeners to sell at
our market each year. Several neighborhood gardeners join us weekly
with their vegetables and culturally specific crops. A fruit grower
from the suburbs of Boston has sold at our market since it began and
he has developed meaningful relationships with the regular customers at the market. Periodically, we have also housed other vegetable
growers.
Even with these successes, we also find challenges in recruiting for
our market. One of the main issues at hand is the fact that our market
is a subsidized market. A significant aspect of The Food Project’s mission is to increase access to healthy, local food for inner city residents.
We set our prices according to what people would pay for conventional produce in the supermarket. Doing this, The Food Project attracts
many customers but also reduces the potential revenue of the market.
In trying to recruit other organic or sustainable growers, however,
prices greatly affect a farmer’s interest and ability to join us at our city
market. Many cannot afford to make the trip for such a small financial return and choose to go to higher end markets throughout the
Boston area where they can guarantee high prices for their product. In
addition, The Food Project grows a wide variety of crops very well. It
is difficult to support more than one vegetable grower on the numbers
we presently have coming to the market. Although many things have
changed in Roxbury and especially in the Dudley Street NeighborOnly ten more minutes until showtime!
42
hood, we also find that some potential vendors are concerned about
the safety of themselves and their vehicles in what has historically
been a high crime community.
A main key to increasing sales is to make the market look like an
exciting place to shop. Over the years, The Food Project market has
expanded with more tables and tents and a diversity of products to
fill out and diversify the market. In 1998, we began selling transplants, non-toxic gardening products, compost, compost bins, bug
books, and other gardening resources to the gardening community.
We also piloted a fresh product booth, where The Food Project chef
sold fresh salads, pastas, soups, and baked products with taste tests
to customers. Adding this diversity increased sales at the market and
encouraged people to return the next week for a different and interesting value-added product. The Food Project often buys products
from local bakeries and other food businesses (i.e. honey) and sells
them at a slight markup. This adds a niche to our stand and may
encourage an increase in produce sales. We have also sold eggs, live
broiler chickens, and other products consistent with the cuisine of the
neighborhood.
Consult your supervisor to discuss how much energy to put into
vendor recruitment. The growers will supply you with the farm plan
for the season and your recruitment can be focused on vendors that
offer a niche product, something that The Food Project is not producing that season. Other vendors may share the vision of growing food
for low-income families and may see participation in this market as a
fulfillment of their business’ mission.
Here are the steps to follow when recruiting food vendors:
•	 Refer to the Filemaker Pro Database. Search for “FM Vendor” in
the organization Database in the Function field to retrieve all records. Check “Vendor” and “Ag Resource” functions in the organization Database and “FMarket Vendor” in the people Database.
Omit, if necessary, any records that do not apply. Print labels.
•	 Identify other potential vendors. Call the Department of Food and
Agriculture or Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets for
any recommendations on growers who are looking for markets.
The DFA publishes a directory of all the growers in Massachusetts and their products. Add any new contacts to the database.
Colorful produce and eye-catching signs
add to the festive atmosphere of the
farmers’ market. 
43
•	 Revise vendor letter, vendor guidelines, and application to sell at
the market (see Attachment 15: Sample Vendor Letter and Attachment 16: Vendor Application and Guidelines). Revise these
guidelines as necessary, based on team meetings. Currently, we
do not require our growers to be certified organic, though we
would prefer a vendor with sustainable practices. This is an especially important clause for fruit as finding organic apples in our
area may be challenging and they may be out of the price range
for our customers. Be sure to include in the letter to vendors a list
of things we can provide them with such as:
	 •	 Tables. We have plenty of tables in the shed and should always have enough for other vendors.
	 •	 Tents. Depending on the time of the season, we may have an
extra tent or a vendor could squeeze under one of our tents.
If the vendor does not have perishable items, they may be able
to do without a tent. If this is the case, let them know they
should be prepared for the heat of the sun.
	 •	 Electricity. There is an electric source at the common. It is lo
cated in the back of the common in the structure. It is in the
center pole, up about seven feet. We also have several extension cords that we can supply to a vendor.
	 •	 Stove. We have a portable “hurry hot” two-burner stove that
we can make available to vendors who may need it.
	 •	 Help. We can always offer a young person to lend a hand at
the vendor table.
•	 Send letter, application and guidelines to all potential vendors in
database. The letter should be mailed in mid-April and application should be returned by the beginning of May. Follow up with
phone calls, encouraging visits to the site and to the neighborhood.
•	 Once the application and vendor fee is received, a follow-up letter
should be mailed to confirm receipt. You may want to highlight
key markets for certain events or other information you think is
necessary.
Attachment 15
Attachment 16
44
•	 Call confirmed vendors in late May to confirm their attendance on
the first market day (fruit vendors usually start later in the season). Ask the growers to predict the harvest date, so that you can
inform the vendors.
•	 Thank you letters should be sent at the end of the market season.
Non-Food Vendors
We have found that vendors who are not selling food items are easier
to attract to our market. Non-food vendors can fill a niche at the
market, bringing their own homemade ideas and products. Non-food
vendors need to acquire vendor permits, but are not subject to the
handling and preparation standards that food vendors must comply
with. Vendors who provide education or resources for the community
are easier to recruit than growers or other producers. Most organizations would be excited to send a representative to the market to let
the community know what they can offer. We also find that these kind
of vendors complement our stand, in that they provide health and
nutrition services, medical screening, entertainment, youth-centered
community development initiatives, and so on.
A popular attraction for customers is the chef demonstrations, coordinated both by The Food Project and the University of Massachusetts
Extension Program. The Food Project has prepared market vegetables
in a variety of ways for tasting at the market. The University of Massachusetts has a farmers’ market nutrition education program that
provides chef demonstrations to farmers’ markets and in the past we
have had a chef on staff to do the demonstrations. Chefs use the vegetables grown by The Food Project and attract people through smells,
sights, and ultimately taste. While people are tasting, they have the
option to deepen their knowledge of nutrition and local food. Community booths are also a beneficial addition to a farmers’ market. Be
creative with your ideas and ask customers and neighbors what they
would like to see offered at the market.
Here are the steps to follow when recruiting non-food vendors:
•	 Go through the database and search by FM for all Farmers’ Market contacts. When choosing people to target, look for organizations providing a service for the community. Contact health centers, restaurants, food nutrition programs, culinary arts programs, 
45
Department of Food and Agriculture, and university programs to
interest them in on-site education at the market.
•	 Depending on your search, you may need to craft two separate
letters; a general one to community groups who may want to do
some outreach at the market and another letter to potential chef
demonstrators (see Attachment 17: General Outreach Letter).
•	 Update the application for vending in addition to the letter and
send it to organizations and individuals. Provide vendors with
an application deadline of May 1st, so that you have a confirmed
calendar of events.
•	 Prepare a calendar to be aware of who is coming to the market
each week.
Neighbor Gardeners
Today was the big day. At long last, Honorio was going to sell his
produce at The Food Project’s Farmers’ Market. Honorio and the
Urban Education Team of The Food Project had been waiting for this
moment for almost a year. The process began when The Food Project
received a grant from the EPA for an Urban Education and Outreach
Program. In the program, several interns from The Food Project began working with local gardeners on land remediation, safe gardening
practices, and creating educational resources for gardeners in Dudley
St. Neighborhood.
Honorio was the first gardener to reduce soil lead levels with us. He
had a beautiful large garden with corn, squash, and beans that he
used to feed his family and neighbors. It was upsetting, however,
that Honorio was growing in lead contaminated soil, and we began
remediating his land immediately. The process was long but successful. Honorio postponed his planting schedule while we added
six inches of compost to his soil. Six inches would provide enough of
a buffer so the plants wouldn’t take in the lead through their roots.
By the beginning of the summer, Honorio’s land was safe to grow
on. Even after this, our relationship with Honorio continued. Once a
week, the Urban Education Team worked with Honorio to help him
transition from conventional gardening to organic gardening. We
identified bugs with him, and discussed organic methods to control
the insect population. As we practiced organic methods with HonoAttachment 17
Sylvia, a neighbor gardener selling her
produce next to The Food Project’s
tables. 
46
rio, he taught us gardening tricks. For example, I learned that squash,
beans, and corn are the three sisters and they work together in the
garden. The corn provides a stalk on which the beans grow and the
beans provide shade for the squash. By the end of the summer, Honorio’s garden was completely organic and free of lead and we welcomed Honorio to sell at the market.
Honorio’s produce was lead free and ready to be sold. That morning
we washed vegetables at Honorio’s home. We placed his table right
next to ours at the market. As the market progressed, I became aware
of what had been accomplished and what could be accomplished in
the future as a community. We had helped Honorio remediate his
land so it was not only safe for his family to eat but he could sell
it at our market and profit from it. This illustrated the potential of
forming a sustainable agricultural system where food was grown,
sold, and eaten in the same community. Now at the market, his
neighbors stop by and express their surprise that Honorio is there,
selling his own vegetables, and discussing his practices in his native
language of Cape Verdean Creole.
-Carla Campbell, Pollution Prevention Intern, 2000
A wonderful tradition at our market is the participation of neighborhood gardeners who sell their vegetables beside us at the market
each year. Sylvia, a neighborhood resident and long-time gardener,
has sold calaloo, collard greens, winter squash, tomatoes, and potted
plants with us since the beginning of the market. During the 2000
season, we had another neighborhood gardener, Honorio, sell his vegetables at the market, thanks to an EPA funded grant to help eliminate
lead in backyard urban gardens. Both gardeners have expressed the
benefit they have experienced from participating in the market in the
development of small businesses for themselves. We find that community members appreciate the presence of these two gardeners –
since they are neighbors and friends. In addition, both gardeners offer
vegetables that are specific to their cultural cooking.
It is important to define, with the rest of the urban team, who will be
responsible for managing these relationships. The two logical choices
would be the market manager or the urban education and outreach
coordinator. You may find it easiest to be the direct contact with the
gardeners since you will need to coordinate tables, tents, baskets,
signs, and chairs. However, since the urban education and outreach
coordinator works and communicates with the gardeners in the offWhen people have a connection to the
land--they have hope in their lives.
 John Steinbeck
47
season, it may be helpful to stay in conversation and make sure that
communication is not overlapping too much. Sometimes contact with
the gardeners means stopping by their homes or jobs since it may be
difficult to get in touch with them.
Gardeners have the option of selling their produce on either Tuesday or Thursday, and it may be helpful to you to encourage them to
commit to one of the days. Work with them on a firm commitment
around schedule, but know that things may change based on what
is happening within their gardens. Be sure they also understand the
coupon program and the use of the scales. The more welcomed and
assisted they feel at the market, the more likely they will return week
after week to sell their goods.
Refer to the section on setting up the market to determine location
of neighbor gardener tables. We have found that over the years of
piloting different table and tent arrangements, it works best to tack on
extra tables at the end of our stand for the gardeners. Signs also help
distinguish their small businesses apart from the rest. We want customers to be able to locate them, talk with them, and purchase their
produce. Gardeners enjoy being on the outskirts of The Food Project
stand, as opposed to separate and under their own tent, because they
enjoy conversations and shared activity with the young people.
Special Community Outreach Projects
Community Outreach around your farmers’ market has multiple
benefits. By reaching out to established community groups, churches,
or neighborhood based service organizations, you use already developed networks and relationships to increase your customer base. In
addition, you are able to make use of services and resources available to these different groups to widen the audience for your market.
For The Food Project, outreach to the community is essential to our
mission and vision. Bringing various groups to the market brings
richness to the youth experience as they learn about people. The
community too is enhanced by hosting a market that brings in the
very people that live in and around it in a deep way. The market itself
becomes a place where community is enhanced and deepened, where
relationships are cultivated, where connections are made.
48
The Food Project’s Elder Pick-Up Program
The Elder Pickup Program is a well-established tradition at The Food
Project’s Farmers’ Market. Every summer, The Food Project provides
transportation to and from four local elder homes to our market.
Elders living in area senior housing centers often find it difficult or
impossible to walk to the nearest market to buy fresh, local produce.
Therefore, The Food Project shuttle service increases access to vegetables and fruits for a population often limited in their food choices,
activity, and mobility. The connection that has developed and continues to develop with seniors has strengthened The Food Project’s ability to serve a diversity of age groups and provide an intergenerational
experience for seniors, youth, and the broader community. The program is partially made possible with the distribution of elder coupons
by the USDA. The interest in the market may change according to the
money allocated yearly for the program.
The van pulls up close to the curb and out pops Claudette with a plastic
stepping stool. She throws a smile at me before opening up the side door of
the van. Twelve beautiful, wise women glance at each other inside the van,
all patiently waiting their turn to exit onto the street. Four Food Project
youth wait to hook arms with each of these seniors, so that they can stroll
through the market stand. Silver hair, the handle of their cloth bag nudged
in the crease of their bent elbows, hooking arms with the nearest teenager.
In the bunch, there is always the leader, the comedian who keeps everything
light hearted and fun, appreciating every moment spent out in the fresh
air, amongst brightly colored vegetables. “Ooh, I sure do love those, and
the peas last week, do you have anymore?” One woman turns to the other,
“The greens were bitter last week.” She is referring to the spicy salad greens
in our lettuce mix. She puckers and shakes her head. A youth helping her
tally her slip shrugs and smiles. Another youth offers a slice of a yellow doll
watermelon. “Just like when I grew up down south. My daddy used to grow
these.” Makes me wonder how many of our young people have a deep connection with their ancestry, their history, their parents’ parents.
The elder pickup program can be a logistically complex program. An
effective and consistent system of communication is crucial to coordinating this program. It is important to locate a dependable contact person at each participating residence from the very beginning.
Sometimes the contact person is a part-time staff who coordinates
events. These positions often have a high turnover rate and, therefore,
require time and investment from the market manager to cultivate
new relationships from year to year. In other cases, the organizer is 
49
actually one of the elders who volunteers time to organize events and
trips for the residence. The interest in attending the market is high
in all residences that we have worked with – the elders appreciate
the fresh food, the event, and the exposure to the youth. However, in
order to make the program run smoothly, it is important for the manager to spend time on these relationships for a smooth and effortless
program.

Here are the steps needed to execute the program:
•	 Recruit interested elder homes. Call the Elderly Commission and
request an updated listing of all elder homes in the city of Boston.
It will help future recruitment if you add any names and numbers
to the organization Database. As you input these organizations
into the database, use the organizational code field to mark them
at “elder pickup recruitment”, so that you can search for them at
another time.
•	 Review the elder homes that have participated in the past. Go
into the organization Database and do a find for “elder pickup” in
the notes field.
•	 Before doing outreach to the coordinator at these centers, review
the summer time evaluation from the previous year. This information may help to determine how many and which groups you
offer the service to, based on staffing and resources for the next
season. A good structure is doing two different pickups on each
market day. Ideally, those two homes would be close to each other
and the site supervisor would only have to go out once to do both
pickups. In order to pick up at two residences, you might need to
set limits on the numbers that can come from each place. Ideally,
do this pickup as close to 4:00 p.m. as possible, otherwise the elders
feel it is not worth their time to come to the market if we have
already sold out of vegetables that they wanted.
•	 In April, contact the coordinators by phone and ask them if they
are interested in the pickup program. Once you have a handful of
interested participants, set up some parameters to work within, to
make an effective schedule. This will require that you know the
start and end dates of the pickup program, the staffing needs for
this time period, and how many participants from each home on the
average. Remember, in the past we have usually run the elder pickup
only for the duration of the summer program (about eight weeks).
The senior citizens who come to the
farmers’ market appreciate the quality of
the produce they can purchase at
reasonable prices. 
50
•	 Once you have done this, you should revise the driving directions
to each home (see Attachment 18: Elder Information) and take a
trial run in the car. This will help determine when the site supervisor needs to leave in order to do the pickup and drop off in a
timely manner. As you estimate time and distance, consider the
time it takes to get in and out of the van and the time allotted for
shopping based on your schedule. Assume that the person doing
the driving knows nothing about Roxbury or Dorchester. Keep
them on main roads with minimal turns.
•	 Type up the schedule, keeping in mind that the ideal would be
to have them shopping between 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. Talk with the
contacts at the homes to determine their needs for the schedule.
Choose one time and one date that will stick for the duration of
the program; changing the protocol in the middle of the program
is a recipe for disaster.
•	 A complete schedule is one that works for you, the contacts at the
elder home, and the person doing the pickup. Before finalizing the
logistics, review the potential plan with the program production
team.
•	 Draft a letter to each elder home outlining the details of the program and the times and dates of their pickups. Tell them what to
do if they need to cancel a pickup; give them numbers to reach
you and provide a deadline by which they must contact you if
they need to cancel. Create a poster (often modeled after our general business poster) for the elder home to display in a common
area. Leave a space to write the pickup day and time. Include
some Farmers’ Market flyers, so that people can see what will
available at the market.
•	 Schedule in a weekly call to the coordinators to remind them of
the pick-ups. This may seem excessive but over the years we have
found that program success depends on that depth of interaction.
If you are working with a youth intern for the season, phone calls
to elder centers build skills of communication, detail scheduling,
community involvement, and integration with the elders.
•	 Make yourself available to the seniors in the program when they
arrive at the market. Periodically check in with contact coordinators about how the pickups are going for them.
Attachment 18
Setting up vegetables on a hot
summer day. 
51
•	 At the end of the season, write all elder coordinators a note thanking them for their participation.
School Partnership Program
Connecting with local schools is another effective outreach strategy
for a farmers’ market. For the last couple of years, The Food Project
has been deepening some of its relationships with the schools in the
areas surrounding the market. We have been partnering with urban
third graders and their science teachers on our food lots to provide
hands-on learning about plant life cycles, agriculture, and hunger. As
a part of the program of understanding agriculture and food distribution, special days at the market for children and their parents have
been organized. These festival-like days include youth centered
activities, special foods, and coupons for young people to bring fresh
vegetables to their homes.
Outreach includes giving flyers to school partnership children during
their school day. Coupons and flyers motivate the kids to come and
bring their parents. (See Attachment 19 for an example of a market
flyer for schools.)

Attachment 19
52
Operations
•	 Staffing at the Market
•	 Market Internship
•	 Produce Availability and Pricing
•	 The Register, Cash and Coupons
•	 Summer Crew Worker Training
•	 Setting Up and Taking Down the Stand
•	 Running the Market Smoothly
•	 Events at the Market
•	 Keeping Business Records
Staffing the Market
“One of my great memories is when our crew was at the Farmers’
Market. People were praising us about how fresh the food looked. I
took great pride in telling them that we had just harvested the food
this morning. This was a great memory because it helped me to realize that I can help people with their needs. That I am useful.”
- Brittany-Iris Scott, Summer Program Participant, 1999
Staffing needs for farmers’ markets differs greatly from market to
market. Traditionally, farmers and their families and friends staff
market stands in larger markets. In the case of The Food Project, the
staff for the market is comprised of youth. As the Farmers’ Market
Manager, you are responsible for training staff, managing operations,
and ensuring the future of the market through proper record keeping
and administration. The success of the market depends on the time,
energy, and effort you invest in staff, as they will make the implementation and administration of the market much easier, if trained and
deployed efficiently.
Staffing can be a difficult business. It is important to have enough
staff to accommodate customers and keep the market moving. Too
few workers behind the table can impact sales, frustrate customers,
and decrease energy in youth and volunteers. However, overstaffing
can cause youth and adults to work inefficiently and may foster poor
role modeling and inappropriate behavior. When determining the
number of workers for the market, consider the following factors:
•	 Volume and diversity of food harvested on the farm
•	 Weather conditions
•	 Customer needs
53
•	 Availability of youth at certain times of the year
•	 Management style
•	 Youth preparedness for running the market
•	 Whether or not a youth intern will be hired
•	 Number of well-trained support staff (youth or adults) that
you have to support the needs of the market
Anticipating staffing needs for the market will be easier as you
become more familiar with the market operations and the youth
programs at The Food Project. While planning the market season,
request sufficient time at Program Production meetings to talk about
market staffing, training for youth, and overall market operation protocols. For spring staffing, talk to the Academic Year Program (AYP)
coordinator to arrange schedules for participating youth. As the
summer approaches, the market crew each week will be determined
by the overall program schedule. When fall arrives, it is important
to inquire with the AYP or Serve and Grow coordinator to discuss
market staffing for September and October. The amount of time spent
training directly relates to the level of experience of the participating
youth. Expect that training hours will increase during the summer
season when youth are new to the market.
Spring Market Staffing
The Food Project hires 60 youth for a summer job-training program
and 22 youth for a leadership development program which runs during the school year. The market is staffed in June by youth who have
participated in the Academic Year Program and have run the market
previously. This is an advantage for a newly hired Market Manager.
The seasoned staffing will allow you to troubleshoot operations and
coordinate delivery, sales, and record keeping. Although these youth
have been trained into the logistics of the market, it is a perfect time
to deepen their understanding of the enterprise, local food systems,
and customer service. In the past, we have given significant responsibilities to the experienced youth in the spring – leading all aspects of
the market from setting up the stand, displaying all vegetables, and
weighing out all the produce.
She would hop off that bus, every Tuesday and Thursday, just in time
for the market to start. Sneaking up behind the stand, she would put
her hands over my eyes, and wait for me to guess who she was. It
was never difficult for me to remember Vanusa’s presence after that
moment, as she would grab a bib, stuff a pen and sales pad in the
front pocket, and head to the stand to intercept the customers speakA semi-quiet moment at the market.
54
ing in her native language. I was never really sure what was said,
but I so trusted this young woman, and felt as though in her own
language, she was serving the customer with the best that The Food
Project had to offer. She was a quick learner. She negotiated price
changes in Portuguese. She was honest with the customers and knew
her product. She was always ready to learn more, recognize a mistake, and correct it for the next sale. We would push each other to
understand the deeper meaning of what we were doing together each
market day. Vanusa felt confident because of her continued desire to
learn more. I felt privileged to have a young woman working for me,
who was interested in more than just selling food. She perfected her
job, a tribute to ongoing training and an internal desire to succeed.
The AYP Coordinator will help you identify youth able to work on
Tuesdays and Thursdays after school during the school year. Raise
any staffing concerns or logistics at the Program Production meetings
in April and then again in August for the fall markets. Up to three
youth are needed for the spring markets, when there is less variety
and volume. In the fall, on the other hand, when the farms are booming, it is important to have at least five youth staffing the market. You
will get a sense of staffing numbers as time progresses. Do not hesitate to let young people go early, if it seems feasible. It will be important that you encourage young people to contact home when they are
leaving early or staying late, as parents might be concerned for their
child’s schedule. This is especially important in the fall, when darkness comes earlier in the day.
Summer Program Staffing
“The farmers’ market is a relaxation from farm work. I personally
like it, because you have a chance to see the produce that you weeded
last week go into the bags of middle-aged men or women. We got a
round of applause for doing such a great job.”
- Maria Vieira, Summer Program Participant, 1992
Staffing needs change as the summer arrives. At The Food Project,
the market is considered one of the highlights for youth in the summer program. The markets require high coordination of Program and
Production Staff. This coordination of schedules will be worked out
during the early spring meetings with the Program Production Team.
Youth are introduced to the farmers’ market for the first time as they
participate as crew members in the Summer Program. The farmers’ 
55
market orients young people to a real business, helping to build basic
skills in customer service, math, and public speaking, as well as shed
light on The Food Project’s mission in working to build a local food
system. The Market Manager is responsible for facilitating this experience, offering a strong presence throughout the summer, and managing skill building. Be prepared to shift your schedule so that you
can accommodate the added hours necessary for both training and
operations.
Each crew is composed of eight crew members, an assistant crew leader, and a crew leader. During the Summer Program, each crew runs
two markets, the first market on Thursday and the second market on
Tuesday. Ten youth is a large number to run a market stand. Developing systems for efficiency and identifying tasks that can be done in
addition to running the stand should be one of your primary concerns
during the summer markets. The training sessions for running the
market are outlined in French Fries and the Food System, a Food Project
curriculum guide, which should give you a sense of how the training
works for each crew.
In general, training for crews is as follows:
•A crew arrives on Thursday morning prepared to participate
in the first training workshop. This takes up to two hours.
The training includes the basics of: completing a sales slip,
vegetable identification and pricing, weighing and bagging
produce, and working with a sales partner, among other tasks.
•On the following Tuesday, members of the same crew will
visit another farmers’ market in the area, speaking with other
vendors who sell at farmers’ markets.
•When the crew has worked both the Thursday and Tuesday
markets, the Manager leads the crew in a one hour Market
Analysis, moving the youth through the bookkeeping and accounting tasks for market administration.
The Market Manager’s responsibility includes organizing, giving
feedback, and being patient. It is important to be cognizant always
of the crews, making sure that they are being courteous to customers, calculating sales correctly, and working well together. When the
youth are running their second market, raise your expectations for
their performance. Work with them to improve their customer service
skills, encourage them to anticipate the customers’ needs and take
greater initiative with restocking items on the stand.
I am convinced that my life belongs
to the whole community, and as long
as I live, it is my privilege to do for it
whatever I can, for the harder I work, the
more I live.
 Melnea Cass
56
The Market Manager is also responsible for noting Standards and
Straight Talk issues (see Growing Together for a description of this
technique). The young people are still working under the standards
agreement with The Food Project and should be held accountable for
any behavior issues.
Staffing Between Summer and Academic Year Program
“Under the youth leaders’ instructions, we picked tomatoes and
squash and basil and six other vegetables, washed them, and packaged them for the farmers’ market. We will never forget the days we
spent on the farm, as I’m sure no student who comes here will. The
land, the people, and most importantly, the chance to produce, prepare and sell – all joined to create an invaluable experience for us.”
 - Vocational Teacher, Concord Assabet Adolescent Services, Inc.
There will be times when you must locate volunteers, Food Project
alumni, or interns to run the markets. Alumni youth are usually the
easiest to integrate into the market since they have run it many times
and are clear about the protocols. Many of the alumni are excited
to come back to reconnect with the neighborhood and spend time at
the market again. When switching staff throughout the season, it is
important to your customers to keep the style, set-up, and rules of the
market consistent. Product and service quality and consistency are
critical features to the success of any business. With this said, however, volunteers, especially those who have a long relationship with
The Food Project, can greatly benefit from working at the market. In
doing so, they see the end goal of the work they have done in the
fields with the youth and staff. They meet the faces of the people that
benefit from local, organic produce. They are able to interact with
the diverse clientele that frequents the market. If you decide to use
volunteers, they should be trained, in the same way as the youth, in
proper protocols and procedures for operation. This necessitates that
the manager meets with the volunteers before the market for training.
In order to schedule staffing for the in-between times, talk with other
staff 3-4 weeks prior to the dates and determine the best options for
the market.
Market Internship
My name is Janique. I am 15, from Peabody. I have been with The
Food Project since the summer of 2000. I have been through the sum-
57
mer program, the DIRT crew which stands for Dynamic, Intelligent,
Responsible Teenagers, and now I am part of the internship program.
I have stayed with The Food Project because, at each level of The
Food Project, I learn something new about myself and other people.
This summer, I am the Farmers’ Market intern. During the winter of
2000, I proposed a Farmers’ Market internship to The Food Project
staff. I did this because I am really interested in the community and
I felt that the Market was a central place to reach out to the community. I loved the Farmers’ Market from my first summer and I wanted
to feel like I was doing more. It is important for me know that the
organic vegetables that we grow are being sold for inexpensive prices
to people who really need them. As the Farmers’ Market intern, I train
crew workers into running the market, I analyze the market with the
crew workers, and I go to Stop & Shop weekly to find out prices for
vegetables and fruits. I also work with the money that comes into
the market, calculating how much money was made and how many
customers came to the market that day. At the beginning of the summer, I set goals for myself. I wanted the market to run well so that
we would make money and reach the goal we had set for ourselves.
My second goal was to make sure that people understand where their
food is coming from and that it is healthy, organic and inexpensive.
I wanted people to know that you don’t have to travel a really long
way to get fresh food. Doing the market internship this summer, I
have grown tremendously. The more I do with The Food Project, the
more I will grow as a person.
– Janique Parrott, Age 15
Integrating diverse people brings richness and life to any market.
Food connects people across ethnic, racial, religious, age, and class
boundaries. Vegetables, fruits, and local products especially have the
potential to bridge gaps between different people because the buyers
can be connected to both the land and the growers who produced the
food that they purchase. Having the farmers and producers selling
the fruits of their own labor and care in the fields brings a very particular experience to a farmers’ market. At The Food Project, youth are
the sales people and the farmers. They spend their summers working
out on the fields, harvesting and washing vegetables, and bringing the
vegetables to their points of distribution – the shelters, the Community Supported Agriculture Program, restaurants, the kitchen enterprise,
and the market.
The mission of The Food Project is “to create a thoughtful and productive community of youth and adults from diverse backgrounds who
Janique Parrot, The Food Project Farmers’ Market Intern. 
58
work together to build a sustainable food system.” Through working
in the fields, attending workshops, running the market, and assisting
at shelters throughout the Boston area, the youth at The Food Project
are introduced into this productive community. After the initial summer, the alumni youth are invited to stay connected with the work
they have participated in for two months and to continue to contribute in the area that interests them. There are several opportunities
for youth to stay involved in building a sustainable food system.
One major way that young people can stay involved is through the
Alumni Internship Program that offers advanced positions within the
organization. In these alumni positions, the youth are challenged to
participate on a deeper level with the work of The Food Project. They
become part of the planning process for workshops and activities,
take a leadership role in carrying out projects, improve their skills of
communication and presentation, and cultivate a deeper understanding of the issues around local food systems.
In 2001, the Farmers’ Market internship was created in response to a
written request from one of The Food Project alumni. The market had
been a powerful part of her summer experience and she wanted to be
more fully integrated into the preparation, marketing, record keeping,
and training for the market. Integrating a young person meaningfully into a position is not to be taken lightly. It is important to assess
the youth’s skills – strengths, challenges, and interests. At The Food
Project, we want the youth to be able to shine in their position using
their natural gifts and abilities. However, we also seek to challenge
youth to take on responsibility and leadership that might not come
naturally and to develop useful and meaningful work ethic and skills.
As market manager, you should brainstorm market tasks that are important, interesting, educational, and manageable for a young person.
Some jobs are more defined than others and allow the intern to take a
great deal of responsibility for them. When tasks are completed, the
intern can report back to the manager. Other tasks are more involved
and nebulous and will need to be done in conjunction and collaboration with the manager.
Below are some of the tasks that were itemized for The Food Project
market intern during the 2001 season. Use this list only as a guide.
The manager should determine the best arrangement for the specific
youth and adjust or change the tasks accordingly.
•	 Price Manager. As the season progresses, vegetables and fruits
come and go at the farmers’ market. In addition, the “running
Crew members working together to
complete a sale. 
59
rate” for vegetables also changes according to the week or
month. At The Food Project market, we sell our organic vegetables for a comparable price to the conventional vegetables
sold in the supermarket. We do this to enable people regardless of income to benefit from access to local, organic food
that is healthy and safe for themselves and the environment.
A visit to the supermarket each week during the season is an
effective way to set our own market prices. Dependent on
whether visits to the supermarket are a possibility for a young
person, the market intern can be put in charge of the pricing of
the vegetables. The intern can type up a price list and change
it weekly for the trainings and for the market itself.
•	 Local Advertising. The intern can be put in charge of sending out PSA’s to local newspapers every other week. There
are several different valuable skills to be developed through
this job. First of all, the intern makes a contact at each of the
local papers and begins to understand media scheduling and
restrictions. In addition, the intern becomes familiar with the
office’s computers, fax machine, and phone system. Through
altering or creating the announcements, the market youth is
challenged to write concisely and clearly to stay within the
word limit. Finally, the youth also is exposed to the importance and activity of advertising for the market throughout the
season. Note: The form for the PSA is Attachment 11.
•	 Market Training Assistant. Each week, a new crew is trained
into the market. The training includes weighing and bagging, customer service, vegetable identification, and money
exchange. During the training, the youth also learn a bit about
the history of the Dudley Town Common Market and the philosophy behind the market. The intern and the manager run
this training together. While planning the training, identify
parts that the intern can explain and run. The training itself is
diverse and active and holds a lot of potential for the development of public speaking and leadership skills.
•	 Produce Display Point Person. A significant aspect of a
farmers’ market is display. At The Food Project, we strive to
have our tables clean, attractive, colorful, and organized. We
also keep our display consistent so that our regular customers
know where to look for carrots, broccoli, or garlic each week.
Attachment 11
60
Setting up the market is a very active and bustling time. The
market intern can be responsible for the display of the vegetables on the tables while the market manager oversees other
parts of the set up process. The intern can direct the youth
who are unloading the vegetable trucks and then oversee the
placement of the produce on the table. Doing the job from
week to week will keep the display consistent. The intern develops skills in directing other people, in creating an attractive
and functional display, and in knowing all the produce that is
being sold at the market.
There are many other tasks that can be taken on by the market intern.
It is important that for some of the jobs, the manager be present. For
example, everyone is interested to know how much cash and how
many coupons were brought in at each market. It is great training for
the market intern to count and record the money and determine the
customer tally for the day. However, in all cases involving money, the
young person should have the protection and accountability of a staff
member present during the accounting process. It is important to
develop and hold trust in one another during all stages of the market.
At the same time, it is necessary to always avoid circumstances that
put young people in situations that are difficult to handle.
The market internship for 2001 was a great success. When two capable and interested people are working together on a project, they
are able to accomplish more and do a better job than if either of them
were working on the task alone. The intern becomes a role model for
summer program youth at the market while deepening his or her personal and work skills. With a summer of working in most aspects of
market management, the intern becomes deeply invested in the work
that is being done. During this process, guidance and support from
the manager is critical. The one-on-one working relationship between
the Manager and Intern promotes learning and growth on all sides.
Produce Availability and Pricing
Having a consistent product for a farmers’ market and fair pricing
are essential components of managing the market. To begin with,
the Market Manager should know what crops are being grown and
during what time period they will be available. The Manager should
serve as a resource for the customers and the young people at the
market. Customers will seek you out for this information from week 
61
to week. The growers who deliver produce from Roxbury and Lincoln and will be able to supply you with specifics around harvest
dates for popular items.
Spend as much time as you can on the farm, in the gardens, and
talking with growers to build your knowledge about agriculture and
food. This information will help you talk with customers about the
food at the market. The agriculture manuals serve as a resources for
any agricultural questions asked by customers or youth. Recipes and
nutrition materials serve as ways to initiate conversations with customers about local food and health. If you don’t know the answer to a
question, find the answer, and let that customer know the next week.
Your connection with the growers through the season will serve as a
base for communicating information to customers about what they
can purchase in the future.
Before the market season, develop an efficient and convenient process
for communicating with growers about product availability. Some
suggestions to set up a system of determining the products for each
week for the market:
•	 Meet with both farmers before the market season (April or May)
to determine when you will communicate about produce. This
should happen twice a week, either Monday or Tuesday morning for the Tuesday market and then again on Wednesday for the
Thursday market.
•	 First, talk with the urban grower because their crops are grown
specifically for the market. The Lincoln crop plan is planned to
supplement the produce grown in the city (Lincoln produce is
grown specifically for shelters & a suburban Community Supported Agriculture Program). Find out what the grower has available
and how much (for example, three crates broccoli, five bunches of
basil, and so on). Write this down. Then call the Lincoln grower to
communicate what you will receive from Roxbury and what can
be supplemented from the Lincoln farm. Since certain vegetables
are only grown in Lincoln, it is important to connect with the Lincoln grower regularly.
•	 In your meetings with the growers, discuss the general quantities
that the market can handle during different parts of the season.
Review the prior year’s records to see how the market changes
over time. During the season, pay attention to each market in
Peppers harvested on the farm in
Lincoln for the CSA and the Farmers’
Market. 
62
order to determine if we are bringing in too much of a certain
vegetable and are consistently selling out of another. We may
only have a limited quantity of certain vegetables to bring in (for
example, corn) whereas there may be plenty of another that can be
brought in if the customers are demanding it (for example, collards).
•	 Create a list of available vegetables to be faxed to local health centers and other community organizations for posting. Many centers have inter-office email and will communicate with each other.
Make a contact in the health center who will do this for you. This
method may work well at 1010 Massachusetts Avenue, where
you’ll find many city of Boston departments, such as Inspection
Services, Parks and Services, and Human Services.
•	 After determining what is available for the week, you should go
to the local supermarket (for example, Super Stop and Shop at
South Bay Plaza) and note the prices of all items you are selling at
the market that week. You may be able to price some organic
produce, but most of your price checks will be from the conventional produce. Usually, we keep our prices at or slightly higher
than the supermarket price for the conventional items (not organic). In the past couple of years, we have tried to increase our
prices slightly and the customers have not rejected this. In general, these customers cannot afford organic prices, but will pay a
little more than the supermarket because they know they are
getting fresher produce.
•	 Round the prices to the nearest quarter dollar to make things
easier for youth running the market (for example, if something is
$1.39 a pound, you might round the price to $1.50 or $1.25).
•	 When you begin pricing items, check with the growers; you may
want to discuss the prices for the upcoming year based on the
experiences of the previous year. Get the growers’ feedback early
and then continue discussing it with them throughout the season.
Get their views on the way each item is being sold (by the bunch,
pound, bag, or head). Standards are already set up for this that
the growers adhere to when they harvest. Remember a cardinal
rule: if no one complains about prices, then it means they are too
low. You know your prices are fair if a few people are complaining. If lots of people are expressing frustration, then prices are too
high. 
63
The Register, Cash and Coupons
“My goal for the summer was to learn about the Farmers’ Market and
I do feel like I have achieved this. I learned I can make a difference
and I am patient and tolerant, adjustable and giving. I did have challenges too. I guess rude people could scare you away from learning
and having fun. I learned that I am not a great salesman, but that I
work very well at the register.”
 - Joseph Mazzarelli, Summer Program Participant, 1997
At an active and bustling market, the coupon and cash exchange can
be a tricky activity. Since farmers’ markets can get very busy, there is
a lot of activity at the cash box. It is easy to be careless while trying to
give customers the quickest possible service. Yet, it is important for
records and market sustainability to make as few mistakes as possible
with money exchange.
At The Food Project, we have always had one cashbox at the market,
which is filled with cash and change at the start of each market. Receipt pads are kept at hand for the youth to add orders and keep track
of their sales at the market. Near the cash box, there is a customer
tally to keep track of the numbers of people that purchase vegetables
from us each market.
Over time, we have entertained the idea of various methods of cash
collection. For part of one season last year, we obtained a cash register, which assisted in adding up the orders and keeping track of the
number of transactions at each market. The cash register allowed us
to total the sales for each market and create a day’s receipt to match
the record totals to the money in the cash box. This method assisted in
catching any mistakes or theft. The cash register also gave an accurate
count of the total customers for each market. Of course, in considering
a cash register as an option, you need to guarantee an electrical source
at the market site. In addition, the manager also needs to be ready to
do maintenance on the cash registers if they are to break, run out of
paper, or jam.
Adding up customer amounts quickly can be a challenging task for
youth. In the past, we often used the market as a way to train the
young people in some basic math skills. Overtime, we have come to
prioritize expediency for our customers. There are other parts of the
market training and analysis that can focus on the development of
quick and accurate math skills. In order to facilitate this adding proCounting cash for the day’s market. 
64
cess during the market, it is helpful to have basic adding machines so
that totals can be figured quickly and accurately. In addition, if each
youth has a calculator at hand, totals do not need to be computed at
the cash register, which will allow for a smooth flow past the cash register. The process for cash exchange is as follows:
•	 The youth who are acting as salespeople take orders, calculate
the overall amount of the purchase, and ask for this amount
from the customers.
•	 Salespeople then bring the cash to the cash register, telling the
cashier the amount spent and the amount that is being given
to them.
•	 The cashier enters the total into the cash register to make a
record of the sale, and makes change for the salesperson.
•	 The salesperson takes the change and returns it to the customer.
Other protocols for using the cash register include:
Each market day, start with $100.00 in the cash register with this distribution:
	 •	 13 — $5 bills
	 •	 18 — $1 bills
	 •	 1 – Roll of quarters ($10)
	 •	 1 – Roll of dimes ($5)
	 •	 1 – Roll of nickels ($2)
By the time the market ends, it is too late to deposit the cash at the
bank. It is possible for the market manager to obtain a night deposit
key and drop off the cash at the end of the market. There are advantages to this option: the money is out of the manager’s hands and
there is no danger of losing it. In addition, since the manager’s position at The Food Project is a part-time position, depositing the money
on the same day saves coming in on a day when there might not be
other obligations to attend to. However, choosing this option means
counting the cash and recording it on the deposit slips the night of the
market. By the time the market closes, the site is cleaned up, and the
vegetables carted away to the shelters, the youth, the grower, and the
manager have all had a long day. It is important to return to the office or another safe place to count and record the money. All of these
steps simply add time to an already long day.
Another option is for the manager to return to the office and lock the
cash in the urban office. Storing the money in the office must be done
Beets! Only a dollar per bunch!
65
carefully and safely. Set up a system for this with the office manager
right away. Keeping the money in the office until the end of the week
allows the cash to be counted and recorded during the youth market
analysis. At the end of each week, the youth qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the markets that they have run. The cash is one
important part of this and the youth benefit from having it there for
accounting purposes.
The office manager will provide the manager with deposit slips for
the market currency. Keep this book of deposit slips in a convenient
place. Set up a consistent system for bank deposits. Sometimes it is
easiest for the manager to bring the deposits after the market analysis.
It is also possible that the office manager could deliver deposits during other trips to the post office and the bank but the logistics of this
must be worked out early on.
Accepting Coupons
The market coupon program of the USDA is a valuable resource to
low-income children, women, men, and the elderly. A farm must register with the Department of Food and Agriculture (DFA) to be able
to accept WIC and Farmers’ Market coupons. In the beginning of the
spring, register our farms so that we can accept coupons at our market. WIC and state dollars are contingent on funding each year. The
Food Project has accepted food stamps in the past, but as of 1998, we
only participate in the WIC Program because of the logistics of food
stamp redemption.
To accept coupons follow this procedure:
•	 In April, contact the Farmers’ Market Coordinator at DFA to check
on the guidelines for participation for the coming market season.
The Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets (FMFM) is also
a great source for information on coupon guidelines and schedules for payment during the season. You can find contact information for both groups in the database.
•	 By mid-April, one of the organizations should have sent you a
Farmer Certification Guideline Overview and an application to
participate in the WIC Program. They will usually do this automatically based on our participation in the past. Call them if you
have not received any notice. Typically, May 15th is the deadline
for application that enables markets to accept coupons. 
66
•	 When you apply for the program, you will be eligible to accept
$2.50 WIC Coupons, $2.50 Farmers’ Market Coupons, and Elder
Coupons. The color of these coupons varies from year to year
and sometimes the amount that these coupons are worth varies as
well. The DFA will send you a letter outlining the details of the
coupon program for that year.
•	 You will receive a packet from the DFA when the DFA has received and approved your participation in the coupon program.
In the packet, you will receive small business cards indicating
your participation in the program and two important numbers
for redemption; the Market Certification Number and the Market
PIN. Keep these cards and numbers on file for use when redeeming coupons.
•	 At this point, you may also begin to receive correspondence from
the Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets. The Federation is contracted by DFA and handles coupon redemption.
Redemption correspondence takes place with the Market Operations Coordinator at the Federation for Massachusetts Farmers’
Markets. Request for Payment information and forms as well as a
redemption schedule will be mailed in the acceptance packet from
the DFA. This schedule will also indicate the last possible date to
send coupons in for reimbursement. In the past, the last date for
FMFM reimbursement has been early November.
•	 The FMFM encourages all markets to redeem coupons throughout
the season instead of saving them all to the end.
Steps for Coupon Redemption:
•	 To redeem coupons, be sure you have done all the record keeping
for each market, and separate the coupons into three piles by the
type of coupon. If we set up a market at another location, then
you will need to redeem coupons separately for each market. It
is important to keep separate records for each market location for
redemption.
•	 Once you have separated the coupons, count them and record
these numbers on the ‘Request for Payment’ form. Fill in other
information on this form including Certification Number and PIN
number, which were given to you by DFA.
Spraying the produce keeps it fresh and
cool. 
67
•	 After completing this form, send your stack of coupons to the Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets. To reduce the chance
that this packet will be lost in the mail, use UPS, who can track the
package, or register the package with regular mail.
•	 A check will come to the Financial Administrator at The Food
Project and will be deposited by him or her. You should request
that a copy of each check is given to you for your files. The money
for this check should be recorded on the sales database immediately.
Summer Crew Worker Training
“The farmers’ market shows us many skills including working with
people, managing yourself and others during chaotic times, and being
patient. “
- Yveline Alexis, Summer Program Participant, 1996
Training for a market crew in customer service, vegetable identification, weighing and cash exchange, among other things is an essential
process for any farmers’ market. The Food Project’s mission is to
work with youth in all aspects of the market and this goal necessitates
thorough training for all participants. Over the years, we have set
standards for how we expect our young people to behave at the Farmers’ Market. See the section on “Staffing the Market” to review expectations we hold for The Food Project youth. The market is one of the
only places where the Summer Program participants act as ambassadors for The Food Project. For this reason, we expect excellent work
at the market from both staff and youth. Role modeling is essential
for the success of the market process and any behavioral issues should
be dealt with immediately.
At The Food Project, we expect that all youth are honest and trustworthy. We give young people a lot of responsibility at the market
and assume that they will see this as an opportunity to be challenged,
held responsible, and given leadership opportunities. It is important
that the youth know the level of responsibility being given to them.
Giving clear instructions and jobs is an effective way to encourage accountability and responsibility at the market.
Steps in preparing youth for the market:
•	 Determine the Summer Youth Program dates and verify the
Roxbury Schedule with the Summer Program Coordinator by
March. The Roxbury schedule should include a timeslot reserved 
68
for market preparation. This schedule should include ample time
for training on all of the aspects of the market experience. When
planning your training sessions, use the former year’s schedules
as a guide for planning and implementing your training program.
•	 Having informative, interesting, and interactive activities to train
market workers is important. Read through the Farmers’ Market training section in French Fries and the Food System. You will
find a series of three lessons for the training of summer program
youth. The first lesson in the curriculum focuses on training
young people into the operations of the market. Always begin
the lesson by describing the market and giving the context. It is
important for the youth to know why we run the market, when we
began it, who it serves, and what it offers to the community. Often
the reasons and background for the market can come from the
youth themselves, so try to make the exercise interactive. What
might be the advantages of a market in this area? Why does The
Food Project commit to working in this neighborhood? When the
youth have an overview, it is time to move into the specifics of
running the market. The youth are divided into learning stations
– money exchange, weighing and bagging, vegetable identification, and customer situation cards. Each group has a leader who
guides them through the important aspects of each station. The
interactive curriculum brings the youth directly into real market
situations and helps them to practice what they will be doing later
in the day. This type of training requires help from others, specifically an experienced youth for each training group. In the past,
advanced interns who have run the market previously have assisted in the market training. You may need to do some preparation in order to find advanced young people to help you. When
you have isolated four youth to partner with you in the training,
take some time to work with them to make the training flow and
make it fun for all.
•	 At The Food Project, training does not just include direct preparation for the running of the market. The second lesson in French
Fries and the Food System is the Market Visit. Each crew is taken
to another farmers’ market in the metro area. The visit exposes
the youth and staff to different markets throughout Boston. Seeing other markets prompts brainstorming on and improving our
own market – presentation, product, customer base, pricing, and
various other market aspects. Since The Food Project is commit-
69
ted to the Roxbury community, it chooses vegetables, operation
times, and prices accordingly. Because other markets have different customers, locations, and missions, they may set up, advertise,
and run the market differently. It is helpful for us to compare our
methods and see if we can adopt any of their successful strategies. (See Attachment 20 for a question sheet for market visits.)
The Food Project has visited the Newton market for many years.
It offers a wide diversity of products, the farmers are often very
willing to talk with the young people, and the market manager is
seasoned and organized and willing to give our group a tour. A
two hour block is usually set aside for the market visit, including
travel, tour, visit, and discussion.
Who wouldn’t love the trip to the Newton market? It has all the wonders of a field trip – mystery, discovery, newness, and treats. On steamy
days, it is a half an hour to relax in the van, an opportunity to have a
cool drink or snack. It holds the excitement of seeing a new place and
the power of a myth, told by past crews of ice cream, fresh baked goods,
and cold drinks. Beyond the novelty and the excitement, though, there
is a beautiful old maple tree that spreads its shade over to the side of
the grouping of 20 farmers’ tents that make up the Newton market. It
is in this space that TFP youth gather in the cool grass, with ice cream
cups and cones, and talk about fresh vegetables, organic production,
class and race issues, food security and justice.
Every week, Janique, the market intern, led the Market Visit preparation as we drove through the construction-laden streets of Roxbury and
Brookline, over to Rte. 9 to lead us to Newton Heights. She handed out
bright orange half-sheets of paper entitled “Things to Think About” to
each of the crew members and together they would read down the questions. At this market, how are things displayed? Are the vegetables at
the market organic? What is the range of prices for the vegetables on
the stands? Where were the vegetables grown? What types of people
come to this market (race, age, economic background)? How many of the
stands accept WIC or Farmers’ Market coupons? She would divide the
crew into 5 teams of 2 and each group would roam freely but with purpose, all of them responsible for bringing back observations, answered
questions, and new ideas for our market to the rest of the group.
Crew D was psyched for the trip. Smack in the middle of the summer,
Janique and I had had time to perfect the trip: we knew what to expect
from the visit, we had gotten to know the growers, we knew where we’d
Attachment 20
A neighboring farm, Drumlin Farm, holds
a farmers’ market. 
70
meet the most traffic, when we should leave Newton in order to get
back to Roxbury in time. We also had developed effective guidelines
for the crews, a mix that began with a formal tour of the market by the
manager, but also allowed for some freedom for observing and asking
questions. Janique and I had run the discussion several times and knew
what issues we wanted to raise if they weren’t brought up by the youth.
Much of that discussion revolved around comparisons and contrasts
– our “convenient, affordable, coupon accepting” market compared to
the “other,” the upscale Newton market. And, yet, with all this, we still
were not prepared for Crew D and the Newton-born, Alex.
Alex sat in the front of the van and offered his services as a navigator.
I pretended that I wasn’t quite sure of the route. When we arrived, Alex
was not to be contained. He kept running into people he knew, hugging
his neighbors, old elementary school friends, and teachers. He would try
to introduce his TFP crewmembers to the plethora of faces that joyously
called his name, but Crew D was off and about, talking to vegetable,
beef, goat, and mushroom farmers. Alex was a little late making it back
to the maple tree shade where we had all gathered and were discussing
the differences seen in pricing here versus our market. He was reeling
from the excitement of being a star in his home.
“Why are the prices higher here?” Janique continued the discussion as
Alex sat down.
Emma piped in. “Because we price them according to what our customers can pay. The people here are able to pay more.” “Yes,” Courtni
continued. “And we only charge what our customers would see in the
grocery store, even though our food is local and organic.” “But I don’t
think their produce looked any better than ours,” Josh said. “And most
of the farmers weren’t organic. I only saw one that was. But still, I
think they are charging too much.”
“Let’s think for a minute why they are charging so much,” I said.
“They are trying to make a living,” Brendan offered. “Yeah,” the crew
leader, Kevin, began. “If we figured out all of our expenses, with staff,
land, materials, time, and youth, we definitely do not make enough
money in our cash box to cover it. We are able to offer vegetables at our
prices because we have other sources of money, isn’t that right? And
because our livelihoods don’t depend on what we bring in on Tuesdays
and Thursdays.” 
71
“And what does that say about sustainability – in terms of economics?”
“Well,” Kevin continued. “It is important to be economically sound as
well as environmentally sound.” “Maybe we could add more products
to the market,” Brendan suggested. “And make more money.” It was
agreed all around that ice cream should be a priority. “Even so, though,”
Alexia said, as she finished her cookie, “I don’t think we should raise
prices because it is part of The Food Project to make this food accessible
to the neighborhood. And I only saw one stand that took the coupons.
We should always take the coupons.” Everyone nodded. It was a hard
mission to compute – being sustainable and fulfilling our commitment
to the neighborhood.
Alex was getting restless. “One thing I noticed,” he said quietly (and this
wasn’t a usual way for him to communicate). “Is that I only saw white
people here. Newton is mostly white. At our market, we have people of
different races and cultures. The people who come to our market speak
different languages.” He paused. “I know it sounds simple. But it is
really hitting me today.” One of Alex’s teachers called out his name
and gave him a huge wave. Alex smiled. He repeated, “It is really hitting me today.”
The “other” – the Newton market – was humanized in a new way for
all of us that day. With Alex’s epiphany about the seemingly vast differences between what he was doing day in and day out with The Food
Project on the land, at shelters, at our market, compared to where he
was from, carried us to a new depth of complexity on that sunny Tuesday. Here we had touched upon economics, culture, race, access to food,
and class dynamics and we had each other to bridge the complicated
gap that we were seeing between two worlds. We stepped out of the
shadiness of the maple tree with a lingering sense of how our very lives
and backgrounds play into our (and The Food Project’s) positioning in
a food system, in a culture, in a society.
•	 The final lesson for the market is the analysis. Every week, each
crew has the opportunity to qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the markets that they ran. The analysis is also very interactive, having youth count the cash and coupons, tally up customer
numbers, and brainstorm on what worked and what did not
throughout the course of the market.
72
•	 In May, read through the lesson plans and revise all necessary
worksheets and tools used for the market training. By June, you
should have contacted farmers’ market managers for the field
trips.
Setting Up and Taking Down the Stand
Time and efficiency is crucial in set up and take down of the market.
At The Food Project, both of these are time sensitive and involve
managing several young people as well as several pieces of equipment. Therefore, the more organized you are in the management of
the young people during the set up and the take down, the better it
will go. Several suggestions for how to organize people during these
two important times follow. Read these over, try them out, and make
any changes that you feel would be easier for you and would help
move things along quickly. Each market manager, based on their
personality and skill set, will add different dimensions to the Farmers’ Market and therefore it is crucial that you find the best ways to
make the market operations work for you. Also, it is important to
communicate exactly and directly with the young people about what
you want them to do. It may be effective to give the youth partners to
work with and make them accountable to one another in each of the
tasks. If it is feasible, create short but detailed “To Do” checklists for
each pair so that everyone is clear as to what they are doing.
Set Up
As part of the training, the manager should divide the youth into set
up and take down teams. For set up, there should be a group of four
in charge of setting up the tents. A group of three should put up the
tables, sandwich board and banner. They should hang the scales,
chalkboards, and bags while the tent group moves to set up the vegetables on the tables. Set up proceeds as follows:
1. Load all of the Farmers’ Market equipment into the market
van. The following is a list of or the items you will need at
each market:
	 •	 Tents (2-4 depending on the season)
	 •	 Tables (4-6 depending on the season)
	 •	 Fold out chairs for gardeners
	 •	 Bin with paper and plastic bags (full)
	 •	 Sandwich boards
	 •	 Bin with hanging scales (4)
Unloading greens for a market.
73
	 •	 All of the bushel and half bushel baskets, some smaller ones
	 •	 Bins with materials (pens, markers, receipt pads, rubber
bands, tools)
	 •	 Metal tubs for displaying veggies with water
	 •	 Bin with vegetable signs
	 •	 Water cooler filled with drinking water
	 •	 Chalk boards and chalk
	 •	 Signs to prop against tents
	 •	 Cash registers and calculators
	 •	 Broom and dust pan
2. At the market site, unload all market equipment and supplies. Unload the tents first and have the tent team set them
up while everyone else is unloading the remaining equipment.
One person can stand at the back door and hand items to people and another person can stand at the side door. No more
than two or three people should unload, as it gets crowded at
the back door of the van.
3. Have each member of the tent group grab a tent leg and first
pull the legs out as far as they will go. Then, they should step
on the tent foot or bolt on the bottom of the leg and push the
leg up from the bottom. Each leg will snap into place once on
the bottom and then again on the top. Make sure that the pins
are in the same holes for each leg. It is important that this happens first to provide shade for the vegetables.
4. Note: The E-Z up tents used for the markets are sturdy and
functional but they are light. When the weather is windy or
stormy, the tents are easily blown around by the wind. Depending on the severity of the conditions, different strategies
for anchoring the tents can be used. One way to prevent the
tents from shifting around on a light wind day is to tie the
tents together with bungi cords or rope. With all the legs of
the tents connected to each other, the wind cannot pull up the
entire structure. However, on blustery days, the tents, even
connected, can be blown around. So on the days when the
wind is heavier, it is important to secure the tent legs to the
ground by attaching them to buckets of sand, crates of heavy
vegetables, or large rocks. In the past, we have placed the tent
legs directly into full crates of beets or parsnips to hold them
down, but since the vegetables need to be put on the table to
Once a market is set up, customers are
eager to shop. 
74
be sold, this is not a permanent solution. It is good to have
a bucket or two filled with sand handy in the van in case a
strong wind visits the market.
5. Refer to the Set Up List and Sequence in French Fries and the
Food System for the rest of the steps involved in set up. (See
Attachment: 21: Set Up List and Sequence.)
Produce Display
The Market
Stands set up
With colorful fruits and veggies,
It seems like the only food that should be eaten.
It’s fresh,
Smiling faces loom over it,
And crowds of old black ladies,
Indian housewives with cast marks
And beautiful silken dresses wrapped around them.
-Jesse Lawton, Summer Program Participant, 1997
The produce display is an important element to the aesthetics of the
market. It is important to make the most of colors, shapes, and sizes
of the vegetables to create an attractive table. For regular customers,
it is nice to have a consistent display for the tables so people know
where to look for greens, root vegetables, or fruits. As vegetables
change through the season, intermix them with the multi-season vegetables. In order to keep the display consistent throughout the season with changing staff, it may be helpful to have a map of the stand
which details where vegetables go on the tables. Use the map during
the market training so the youth have some idea of the set up before
they arrive at the market site.
Produce will arrive from Lincoln and Roxbury in orange harvest
crates and white buckets. The trucks usually arrive by 3:15 p.m. Have
everyone unload the produce and bring it to the appropriate table.
Once the unloading is done, the pairs should begin setting up the
table they were assigned during the training. Oversee this carefully
to make sure everyone is moving efficiently and placing the vegetables at the correct places.
Attachment 21
75
Once all the produce is unloaded, make sure everyone remembers
which table he or she is responsible for setting up. Remind the youth
to use the bushel baskets for bigger items of high volume and to use
the half-bushel baskets for smaller items. The very small baskets
should be used for small things we have a limited quantity of like
hot peppers, artichokes and herbs. Encourage the youth to imagine
themselves as the customer and to think how the produce will look
from the other side of the stand. A typical produce display and the
appropriate baskets to use are as follows:
1. Greens Table
	 •	 Collards, lettuce, bok choy, swiss chard in the long metal tubs
with about two inches of water for their roots to absorb.
	 •	 Salad mix in a metal tub without water or in a half-bushel
basket.
	 •	 Broccoli, cabbage, and peas in half-bushel baskets or in bushel
baskets if we have a large quantity.
2. Roots Table – Celery, beets, carrots, daikon, turnips, potatoes,
onions, and garlic. If there is a large quantity, use the large bushel
basket; otherwise, for a smaller quantity, use the half-bushel basket.
3. Specialty Table – Items like bread, flowers, herbs, beans, honey,
okra, and anything else that doesn’t have a place on the other
tables can go on this center table.
4. Summer or Fruit Crops Table(s) – Tomatillo, peppers, tomatoes,
corn, eggplant, cucumbers, summer squash, winter squash, cantaloupes, watermelons. This table may vary depending on availability or to make it easier for customers to see the vegetables on
the stand.
Once the produce has been displayed, workers should spray all
greens with water. Any overstock of greens should be maintained in
the same manner. Squished tomatoes won’t sell either, and need to be
culled from the stand or overstock. The inventory pair is responsible
for restocking and maintaining all vegetables during the market.
76
Market Signs
Recognizable and eye-catching signs are important for the market.
The Food Project has a series of market signs. In addition, the DFA
sends out signage that identifies us as a WIC vendor and as selling
Massachusetts grown produce. These signs should be posted at the
markets. Permanent signage for the market site would be a great asset
to the market.
Any advertisement of the market (such as a sandwich board) should
indicate the name of the market and site, the city, and dates and times
of operation. Multilingual messages ensure that all of our market
constituents can become informed. We have sandwich boards that
contain these items. There are smaller, blank ones that can be used to
advertise specials. Try setting them up a block or two away from the
stand and pin up a poster announcing popular vegetables like tomatoes or corn.
Signage that is displayed on the produce stand should have a picture
of the vegetable, fruit, or product, some color, multilingual messages,
and a place to write the price per pound. This is the recommendation
of theDepartment of Food and Agriculture.
Other signage may include harvest dates for certain items, announcements of demonstrations, lists of events, information about The Food
Project, and special offers. Be creative and bold!
Take Down
Focus must be held even to the very end of the market when the take
down session begins. By the time we are ready to close the market for
the day, both youth and staff have been working long hours and are
tired. Conditions like this make it very easy for mistakes and frustrations among co-workers to occur. As with the rest of the market
experience, the more clearly jobs are given, the more efficiently everyone moves. Below are some steps that will help in finding your own
rhythm with closing the market. Note that it helps tremendously
to start the closing process before the actual end time of the market.
Start half an hour before the market ends.
•	 Set up a station to weigh the left over produce behind the stand.
Place the big scale on an orange crate and begin to line up the
overstock on one side of the scale. Assign a few people to consoliA little higher on the left? How’s it look
now?
77
date some of the overstock under the tables and transport it to the
weighing station.
•	 Send two people to take down the sandwich board and load it into
the van. Have them also take down the banner under the clock,
fold it, and put it away.
•	 Depending on how busy the market is, you may also be able to
consolidate the produce on the tables and take down one table or
a whole tent while the market is still open. Make sure at least two
young people remain behind the stand to help customers while
the rest begin to take down the stand.
•	 At this point the banner behind the stand can be taken down and
folded up. If there are not too many customers, have some young
people start taking down extra bags and scales. Also, young
people can unload boxes from one of the growers’ trucks and line
them up in rows behind the scale. The overstock will be poured
into these boxes to be weighed and then brought to the shelter.
Once closing time arrives, bring the group together to announce the
plan of action. When the group is joined together, all focused on a
common goal, the work goes faster and is implemented more efficiently.
•	 The first big job is to get all of the produce off the tables, consolidate the crates of produce, and put same vegetables into boxes
to be weighed. The vegetables will then be brought to the shelters. For the most part, only one type of vegetable goes into each
box. The Food Project records how well each vegetable sells at
the market so it is important to keep the produce separate for
weighing and equally critical that weighing is done carefully and
written down carefully as well. The grower will either deliver the
produce to the shelters in the orange crates, emptying them into
containers when they arrive there, or they may have boxes to load
the vegetables into so that the vegetables can just be dropped off.
Because many of our boxes are donated, they are different sizes
and weights. Be sure to explain how to load these boxes to the
young people. The sturdier boxes should hold heavier items.
Sometimes it is helpful to put heavier items in the smaller boxes to
distribute the weight better. The youth can unload the same tables
they loaded. They should take the vegetables off the tables and
combine them with the overstock into the cardboard boxes.
78
•	 Each youth should then bring a box to the scale and the grower
will record the weight. They should place the box on the other
side of the scale and go back to unloading the table. Eventually,
you should have two young people on the other side of the scale,
carrying the boxes to the van that will go to the shelter. They
should be advised to load the heavier things first, on the bottom.
•	 Once this is complete, have a few youth clean off the tables, break
them down and carry them to the van. Others should consolidate the bins, baskets, and tubs and load them into the van. Four
people should break down the tents and bring them to the van.
•	 You should supervise the loading of the van in order to ensure
that there is enough room for everything.
•	 Towards the end, you should assign someone the job of sweeping the site. We are given the privilege of using the site from the
Parks and Recreation Department and it is important that we
leave the site looking better than when we found it. The person
who sweeps should do a thorough job. Others should check the
cement ledge to throw away any garbage we have left there.
•	 Once this is complete, send the young people home and unload
the supplies back into the shed. Often the urban grower is available to help you, but you should make plans for this ahead of
time. It is possible that the Volunteer Coordinator could find you
a volunteer to help with this task.
Each week, Marcus would get psyched to pack the back of the van
as precisely as possible so that each farmers’ market table, tent, and
bin fit perfectly and could be unloaded with ease at the next market.
Over time, he became the Master Conductor of the whole process,
coordinating the delivery of infrastructure to the back of the van and
then requesting a specific item from the youth who delivered it to
him.
“Hand me the table, no, not that table, the longer one. And how
about the tents, one, two, where is the third? The pink bin has some
heavy stuff in it, be sure that that goes on the bottom and the bin
with the hanging scales goes on top. Let’s push this one just one
more inch to the side and then that sandwich board can fit in right
here.” 
79
It was at that moment that I realized that for some of these young
people, their job wasn’t about glamour, or doing the task that would
make them a celebrity in the group. It was often about getting the job
done, well and with precision, and becoming a master at something.
Whether he planned for it or not, Marcus did become a celebrity, for
packing the van, like it had never been packed before.
Running the Market Smoothly
“I have learned business skills, people skills, leadership skills, and a
lot about community. I have learned to be a motivator without bossing people around. I have learned how to work with people one-onone.”
- Janique Parrott, Farmers’ Market Intern, 2001
There is no better way to become a good farmers’ market manager
than by running a farmers’ market. Your skills will only increase with
your experience as you find better ways to deal the issues and problems that can come up in this job. The Food Project has run the Farmers’ Market at the Dudley Town Common for several years now. Over
time, we have learned many things about working in the community,
serving customers, and managing the market with young people.
Each season, as we become better and better at what we do, we learn
more things. Many of the tips we have already gathered have been
introduced in early chapters. Below is a sketch of the types of things
you can expect at the market and advice on how to make your life and
job easier. As stated before, your success at the market will also be
based on the personal touch that you bring to the market.
You are off to a good start at the market if the young people staffing
the market are prepared, well trained, and on time. The goal is to be
open at or before 4:00 p.m. It helps if you are a constant presence with
the young people as they staff the market. Set expectations for the
young people and hold them to these expectations throughout the
market. Structured guidelines of behavior and performance are crucial to success and can provide continuous growth and development
for them over the season.
It’s An Experience
It is a hot August afternoon. The time is just about 3:45. Most of the
vegetables are out of the van and onto the tables and you are running
around making sure the seven youth working with you have someSet up for the market begins around
3:00 pm for a 4:00 pm opening time.
80
thing to do, that all of the vegetables have been accounted for and
that the five customers hovering around the corn are not lifting them
into their shopping bags. Welcome to the Farmers’ Market at the
Dudley Town Common. A wild, fabulous, frustrating and exhilarating experience. It will only get better with each markets you run.
Setting up a beautiful stand efficiently and on time is crucial. But
even when it is only three quarters set up, during the height of the
season, eight or ten eager shoppers will hover. Though you are running around lifting crates and sweating, customers are anxious to buy
despite the fact that you are not ready to sell. After six times of asking
folks to please wait and stand back while you try to weave a fiftypound crate of potatoes around their eager bodies, you may begin
to get a little frustrated. One of the most important things you can
do for yourself is anticipate this. Know this mantra: The market can
be crazy from 3:45 to 5:00. It requires a lot of energy from you and the
young people. If you prepare yourself for this, you will probably be
exhilarated by it.
One way you can ease the hectic nature of the market’s opening is by
purchasing an “Open/Closed” sign. In the past, we have tried to run
a string between orange crates in front of the stand so people would
not get close until we were ready. The string we used was a little too
thin and unnoticeable and was taken down after we realized it was a
liability. You may want to try a combination of a large open/closed
sign with thick, brightly colored rope. Just make sure that the site is
still accessible to the staff who are setting up.
Customer Service
It was only the third week of the summer program when I began to
notice bags of certain vegetables, carefully weighed, stashed neatly
beneath the market tables. At first, I assumed they were simply the
results of a mistake, that a customer had come and changed their
mind and that the youth didn’t have time to return the vegetables
to the display. So, as the youth workers scurried around me, assisting customers and restocking vegetables, I inconspicuously began to
take out the stranded vegetables, putting them back into the bins and
baskets that lined the colorful tables. As I was returning the last of
the shell beans to their display crate, I heard a young voice call out
from the other end of the table, “Kristin! Stop! Those are saved for
the shell bean lady!” I immediately knew who “the shell bean lady”
Energy from the young people and the
customers can create a frenzied atmosphere at a summer market. 
81
was – and I realized my mistake. The youth had taken an order from
one of our regular customers, “the shell bean lady,” at the previous
market and had put aside a pound for her. This type of attention and
care for the customer coupled with an interest in the community and
its needs makes The Food Project Market a very special event every
week. I think it comes from the fact that the youth, through their
work on the land, their service in shelters, their interaction with the
community, have developed a deep investment in this market. It is
theirs – and they take pride in offering the fruits of their labor to a
diverse community that values fresh, delicious produce. The day I
was caught returning those shell beans to the table, I learned a great
lesson. As a market manager, I am only peripherally in control. I do
my best to train the youth in good and efficient market skills. But, in
the end, the market’s customers were and are in the hands of each of
the youth that graces its tables. In this case, the youth had brought
customer service to another level, giving special personal attention,
and following through with a commitment from market to market.
At that moment, the market was busy and bustling, so much so that I
couldn’t praise the youth for her maturity and care. Instead, I smiled
broadly and began carefully the shell beans again.
We constantly encourage our young people to be as friendly and
considerate as possible when helping customers. You have a dual
role in this regard. Keep an eye and ear on young people as they help
customers, encouraging them to engage customers and go out of their
way to help them. You need to be a resource for customers as well.
They need to come to you if they have a complaint, problem or question that a young person can’t deal with. Anticipate these needs and
step into situations as they come up. As the old saying goes, “The
customer is always right.” Regardless of the situation, it is helpful to
keep that in mind in terms of your responses to customers. Granted,
we cannot always accommodate our customers, but it should be our
starting point. That said, here are some common complaints and situations you may come across during the market season:
•	 Complaints about prices. We price our produce compared to
conventional produce and our vegetables are organic, so we feel
that we are providing a good product at reasonable prices. We are
also willing to look at our prices and if several people complain
about the same item, we will revisit the price.
Getting ready for a fun market day.
82
•	 Complaints about waiting. From 4:00 to about 5:00 is usually
our busiest time at the market. People know that if they want
the more popular items that sell out quickly, they should come as
early as they can. For this reason, there can be a lot of impatience
and frustration if customers see that we are selling out of corn.
This is a time you should step in and help the young people.
Also, be aware of customers trying to get a young person to help
them while they are helping someone else. You should step in
and ask the customer to please wait while the young person helps
the initial customer. You may also want to address the crowd,
asking for their patience as we try to help everyone as quickly as
we can.
•	 Theft. Occasionally a young person will come up to you and say
that they think a customer has walked away without paying. You
should ask if other youth have seen this and after a couple of validations approach the customer yourself. Ask them if they have
paid for their item. Tell them that perhaps they forgot, because
we didn’t see them pay. This is about all you can do and if the
person strongly feels they paid, you should let them go.
•	 Disturbance. The Dudley Town Common is at a highly visible
intersection and anyone can walk on the common. Occasionally there will be a drunken person or someone else disturbing
the market or the young people. If you see an individual whom
you would not feel comfortable approaching, call a community
police officer who will come to your assistance. You should try to
anticipate these moments and stop them before they occur. Often,
ignoring these people rather than confronting them will make
them go away. If they are really disturbing the youth, ask if you
could speak to them for a second away from the group. Tell them
that we are trying to train young people here and you would appreciate it if they let the young people focus on their job.
Maintaining Relationships with Local Businesses
It is important for any existing business to create positive relationships with its neighbors. Shops, stores, and outlets can foster business for each other. The businesses that line the streets across from
the Dudley Town Common are important stakeholders in our market.
The Food Project youth will often use their services and buy their
products. Many of their customers are drawn to the colorful tents
and beautiful vegetables displayed on the square. On the other hand, 
83
The Food Project has learned through surveys that the presence of the
market has increased business throughout the area. The neighboring
businesses often come over to buy our produce and talk to the youth.
At market’s end, we frequently give some of the produce to the store
owners and workers.
For these reasons and others, these are important relationships for
the market manager to foster. When you put up posters around the
neighborhood, use that time to introduce yourself to the business
owners and let them know of any changes to the market for the season. In the last couple of years, there has been some turn around in
the local businesses, so some of the current ones may not be aware of
the market.
Below is a list of our recent business relationships. Explore others to
establish new connections in the community.
•	 There is a pizza place across the street from the market. During
the summer, the youth often take their dinner break there. In the
past, the owners have bought tomatoes and other vegetables from
the market for their restaurant.
•	 Also across the street are two places that allow us to use their
bathrooms- Montesino’s Tire Shop and La Alianza Hispana. Both
also allow us to advertise for the market with flyers and signs.
•	 Montesino’s has been receptive to us in times when we needed
tools or a hand in fixing something.
•	 La Plazita, a small store across the street, serves good lemonade
that we’ve enjoyed over the years.
It is important to The Food Project to make sure that our effect in the
neighborhood and at the market site is a positive one. Try checking in
with the businesses during the season and at the end. See how things
went for them. Was there anything about the market that disrupted
their business? Would they like to see any changes to the market?
Would they like to advertise with us or become more involved with
The Food Project or the market itself?
Events at the Market
During the planning section of this manual, we advise you to develop
an outreach plan for the season. While our central mission for the
market is to provide produce to the community at reasonable prices,
we also aim to be a resource to the community and try to offer more
than just vegetables. This distinguishes us from a supermarket and
So much to choose from!
84
can be an incentive for customers to shop with us; they see the positive impact we can have on the community as well as on individuals.
Additional vendors or events occurring at the market can encourage
customers to linger, buy more vegetables, get connected with their
neighbors and have an enjoyable shopping experience.
As stated earlier, the amount of time you spend on outreach will
depend on the amount of time available to be dedicated to the market
outside the actual market operations. At the very least, it is important to celebrate the first market and the final market. Also, it is nice
to have other market festivals throughout the season. This helps to
bring more people to the market and to keep momentum up during
the season. As stated earlier, you could do a big celebration midseason or a few smaller celebrations around the height of the harvest
season of certain popular vegetables. Talk with the public outreach
coordinator at the organization to see if they might like to collaborate
on an outreach event at the market or if they would be willing to offer
their help as you develop and coordinate events.
Here are some ideas and themes to think about as you plan events.
Who is your audience? What are the types of things customers in
general as well as this specific community enjoy? Free food is always
a sure fire way to generate happiness at an event. In the past we have
celebrated the first market by giving away strawberries with free
strawberry shortcake. Set up a separate table, either with a capable
young person or a staff member running that table throughout the
market. We have a good supply of kitchen items for this. Be sure to
check in with the growers about which vegetables will be in surplus
this season. Music is another item that will attract people to your
celebrations. In the past, we have had a local Cape Verdean string
band play at the market. A Roxbury group called the Silver Leaf
Gospel Singers set up on the ledge behind the stand and played for
an hour. We had a table with one of our growers’ assistants making
corncob dolls with children at the market. At another table a staff
member handed out cookies for people to decorate with sprinkles and
icing as well as candied apples for a cheap price and popcorn. At this
last market, we were also able to buy apples from a local orchard and
resell them.
Allow yourself at least a month to plan an event such as the final
market celebration described above. This will allow you some time
to play phone tag with possible presenters or vendors. Inventory
A booth from the University of
Massachusetts Extension program
participating at The Food Project’s
Farmers’ Market. 
85
staff talents at a staff meeting and ask if anyone would be interested
in contributing to a market celebration. Using the products that are in
season at the time of the celebration is a great way to use extra produce, promote a seasonal product and to teach customers how to use
that item. You may want to feature a vegetable during the season like
tomatoes and have a visiting chef share five different ways to prepare
a tomato. For the children, maybe you could have someone dress up
in a tomato suit and hand out seeds. Be creative and also be reasonable. Don’t plan an enormous event if you don’t have the time to really do it or the staff to support you. Many great events can come off
low-cost and without a ton of planning.
In addition, always remember who your audience is. What types of
music do they listen to, what do they like to eat? In this neighborhood, Cape Verdean music, gospel, hip-hop, R&B are all popular
types of music. As you go out to lunch in the neighborhood, you will
notice the popular types of food; rice and beans, pork, barbecued
chicken, collards cooked with meat, mashed potatoes and biscuits. It
will always be hard to convince someone to try something completely
different than what they are used to. Take what people already know
and add one of our vegetables to it and it will be more easily received.
Make sure you check your budget for events and food and work
within that total when buying food or hiring entertainment for these
celebrations.
Keeping Business Records
“My overall expectation for my position was to work with the
market manager on topics concerning the market. I was interested
in doing all the things that involved running a market. For example,
trainings, analyzing, finding prices and so on. I expected it to be demanding in terms of there being a lot of work and there was.”
- Janique Parrott, Farmers’ Market Intern, 2001
Keeping track of details, exchanges, and customers for any business is
important. At The Food Project, the Farmers’ Market is an enterprise
as well as a community outreach and education program. In order to
make the most of our enterprise effort and to improve the market year
to year, it is greatly beneficial to have numbers and observations to
assist and guide decision-making. In addition to the task of keeping
accurate records, The Food Project seeks to carry out data collection
Musicians playing during a summer
market. 
86
and record keeping in partnership with youth. It is especially important that the market manager is on top of the record keeping process
and system because it can get confusing, especially when youth are
only working two or three of the markets. To mix managing young
people with managing a business requires a high level of organization and patience for the market manager. Make sure you know the
systems well before introducing them to the youth. When training
the youth on record keeping at the market, make sure they understand the larger context for what they are doing: Why are we keeping
these records? How is data like this helpful? What skills will they be
developing when weighing, counting, and recording at the market?
In the course of your tenure as the market manager, you may come up
with more effective ways to record and organize the data that you are
collecting. Before changing any of the templates for the market data,
share these ideas with your supervisor and the business manager so
they make suggestions and assist you in changing the present system.
Record Keeping Tools
Something to carry your record keeping materials is essential. You
may want to keep a market manager’s notebook with you. At The
Food Project, market managers have often carried a plastic file box.
They are waterproof and sturdy and enable you to carry multiple
files at a time. In this box, have a small three ring binder to carry your
record, two file folders, a file with the masters of the recipes, and a
section to keep coupons and cash to be deposited. Additional folders
or organizational tools may be required for your own style, but use
these as a guide.
Record Keeping with Youth
Record keeping at The Food Project demands attention to detail.
Over the course of the years, however, systems have been set up that
include spreadsheets and templates that assist in organizing the information. As long as time is invested, keeping accurate records need
not be a difficult aspect of the market. The Food Project keeps careful
records of where its produce goes – whether to markets, shelters, enterprise, or our Community Supported Agriculture Program. For our
own organizational use and for information for our funders, we need
to accurately report the poundage of vegetables that goes through
each distribution channel.
After a crew has run two markets, the market manager will lead them
in an Accounting lesson, a mini-Market analysis. See French Fries and
the Food System for an explanation of this lesson. 
87
Keeping Invoices. When the growers from Lincoln and Roxbury arrive at the market site with the harvested produce, each will have an
invoice for the vegetables they are delivering. The market manager is
given the yellow copy of this invoice. The information will be transferred from the invoice to another spreadsheet. However, it is necessary to save the invoices in a folder in case of the possibility that one
of the numbers is copied wrong and there is a discrepancy that occurs
in the records.
Recording the vegetable weights on spreadsheets. The vegetable
weights from the invoices of both farms are transferred onto the
vegetable sales logs (see Attachments 22-24: Market Sales Logs). Each
week, the manager should make two copies of the sales logs for each
of the markets. The first copy can be used as a guide when the manager or intern goes to the supermarket to check prices at the beginning
of every week. In addition, the sheet can be used to refer to when
speaking with the growers about the quantity and type of vegetables
that they will bring to the market. The second copy is used at the market. Using the invoice measurements, a responsible youth should be
chosen to transfer the information onto the sales log sheet. The first
two columns, L/Quantity and R/Quantity are reserved for jotting
down the quantity estimated for delivery to market by the Lincoln
grower and the Roxbury grower. The next two columns are for actual
weights from Lincoln and Roxbury. When the grower arrives with
the vegetables, they will hand the manager the invoice that details
each vegetable, the quantity of each and the total in price and pounds.
You can easily explain to a young person how to copy this information into the book during the market. With this information, we know
how much of each vegetable came into the market, from Roxbury and
Lincoln, as well as the poundage of all the vegetables together.
Recording end weights. At the end of the market, all of the produce
is weighed before being delivered to the shelters. The urban grower
and a selected youth will weigh all the left over produce. The grower
fills out an invoice for the shelter delivery that itemizes each vegetable
and its poundage. A copy of this invoice is given to the shelter and
the other is kept by the grower for the files. As the grower fills out
the invoice with weights, a responsible youth fills in the Sales Log
sheet with the same weights. When weighing the vegetables to go to
shelters, the youth should use the categories farther to the right on
the sheet, marked Lincoln and Roxbury. Right across the row, the
youth are able to compare how much of one vegetable came in at the
beginning of the market, how much was sold, and how much is being
donated to the shelters.
Attachment 22
Attachment 23
Attachment 24
Young people testing their market skills.
88
Revenue record keeping. Cash and coupon documentation at the
end of each market is another record keeping necessity. It is important to keep track of the revenue for each specific market so we can
track our progress from year to year. After the market is finished,
make sure that the cash register or cash box makes it safely to the
van and is taken to the office once the vehicle is packed. During the
Accounting sessions at the end of the week, each crew will count up
the total cash and coupons received for the markets they ran. In order
to do this, the Market Manager should print out copies of the Master
Accounting Sheet (See Attachment 25). This will provide a worksheet
for the youth to calculate the totals for the market. The sheet allows
you to record cash, coupons, and other costs while figuring out your
profit for the market. It also has a place to record the numbers of customers. This spreadsheet is in the accounting folder in the Farmers’
Market folder on Shared Files, so you can transfer the numbers to the
computer if it helps you keep track of your records. Save the Market
Accounting sheets to transfer the information into the master market
spreadsheet. Depending on the amount of help you have, you may
want to fill these sheets out for each market during the academic year
as well. If you have a market intern, they could also be trained to do
this .
Customer Tally. Over the years, The Food Project has been building
a customer base for the market. Keeping records of customers allows
us to gauge how much we are growing each year. The numbers of
customers at markets during August and September are often much
greater than the other months of the market and it is good to use
predictions to get a sense of how much produce we need for each
market. Customer tallies have been taken in a variety of ways. In the
past, each individual youth was responsible for making receipt slips
for the customers they worked with. At the end of the market, these
slips would be counted to determine the customers that had come
that day. Theyear we had a cash register at the end of the market, we
used the receipt slip to count the number of transactions we had over
the course of the three hours. Another method that has been used
is to have a customer tally sheet next to the cash box or register and
instruct youth workers to put a check mark on the sheet each time
they sell to a customer. Each of these methods has its strengths and
weaknesses and none of them are a completely accurate method of
recording. In the early stages of planning the market, decide which
method seems most efficient to you and work to make it as accurate
as possible throughout the season.
Attachment 25
Conducting surveys in the community
helps The Food Project run a better
farmers’ market. 
89
Compiling Data on the Market Spreadsheet
Spreadsheets are an easy way to keep track of the variety of information collected about the market. During the 2000 season, a new series
of linked spreadsheets were developed for the market manager to
keep track of all the information necessary for the quarterly reports
(see Attachments 26-32). For managers outside of The Food Project,
these forms can be used as a guide and altered according to the specific needs of the market.
For The Food Project market managers, these spreadsheets are on
shared files and should be used to accurately record the happenings
at the market throughout the season. Ultimately, all of the information
described above – vegetable weights, revenue, and customers - will
need to be inputted to this spreadsheet. The market manager will
save a lot of time at the end of the season by reserving a weekly or
biweekly time to do the data entry necessary for market records. By
following the earlier recommendation of cashing in the coupons on a
biweekly basis, the manager can use this time to input the quantities
into the market spreadsheet. In order to do this, the manager needs to
empty the cash register after each market and organize the cash and
the coupons; label the coupons with the Certification Number, and
then record them into the spreadsheet.
The market spreadsheet is a series of eight linked sheets. When filling
out the spreadsheet, begin with the last sheet called ‘Farm % Breakdown by #’s’(Attachment 32) and ‘Farm % Breakdown by Dollars’
(Attachment 31). When you input numbers into the market spreadsheet only input the data entry into the columns with dashed marks
outlining them. The rest of the columns contain pre-programmed
commands. You will see that as you input numbers into the spreadsheet, it will automatically carry those numbers over to certain
spreadsheets and calculate them. Input the last two spreadsheets first
with the information you get from the growers on the total quantity
and price of the produce they brought to the market. The next sheet
is titled ‘Market Donation Sheet’ (Attachment 30). Input the total
end weight at the market and that is the amount that will be donated.
The next two sheets titled ‘Boston Stats’ (Attachment 29) and ‘Lincoln Stats’ (Attachment 28) and do not have any data entry. The final
sheet for data entry is called ‘Market Receipts’ (Attachment 27) and
that is where you input the total cash, coupons and customers for that
market. When all the figures from these six sheets are inputted, the
final spreadsheet, the Market Statistical Summary Spreadsheet (Attachment 26) is completed. Be careful to check all information to determine whether the formulas have translated a correct answer. One
small error in data input can alter the records significantly.
Attachments 26-32
Attachment 32
Attachment 31
Attachment 30
Attachment 29
Attachment 28
Attachment 27
Attachment 26
90
91
Evaluation
•	 Completing Your Records
•	 Analyzing the Market
•	 The Marketplace
End of the year evaluations are crucial for each program within The
Food Project. They allow for definitive completion of tasks and
formal evaluation. Most importantly, they enable us to develop tools
and strategies to improve the next season. At the end of your market
season, you will have several tools available with which to evaluate
the market.
Completing Your Records
The final records for the Farmers’ Market are needed for the rural agriculture and urban agriculture year-end reports. All of the information needed should be found on the market spreadsheet. At the end
of the market season, go through the spreadsheet and make sure all
of the information is filled in accurately. Notice if the functions on the
spreadsheet have worked. If things are highlighted in red or there are
asterisks in the cells instead of numbers, this could signify an error.
Sometimes the solution is as simple as enlarging the width of the cell
to make room for all of the numbers. The red could be telling you that
there is a high margin of error in the data. It is helpful to look at these
numbers because it could mean there was an error in your data entry
or at the market. If you are having trouble deciphering the spreadsheet, speak with our business manager, your supervisor, or one of the
growers.
At this time, you should also make sure that you have sent all of the
coupons into the Federation of Massachusetts Farmers’ Markets for
redemption. They will send you a mailing in November letting you
know when to expect the check. This check should go directly to the
business manager and a copy should go into your records.
Analyzing the Market
So, they must have really listened. To the growers, to the neighbor
gardeners, to their customers, to the Urban Education Interns, to each
other, and to the land. They listened in workshops, in the field, in the
shelters, at the market site. When the DIRT Crew got up to present
the results of the market analysis this fall, they did not merely de-
92
scribe numbers, graphs, and charts. They took the information they
had synthesized and compiled, added it to the body of knowledge
they had built over the five months of involvement with The Food
Project, and shared and reflected with strong voices and an ability to
add depth and nuance to their answers.
Did our customer base decrease in fall of 2001? The line graphs demonstrated that our customer base was lower compared to 2000 during
the final two months of the market. How could this be explained?
Carmen bent down over the graph, placing her finger on one point
along the line, and named the spot – “Here is September 11th.” From
the 11th on, we all observed the gradual, but noticeable, decline of customers and revenue at the market. There were certainly other factors
to be considered, in particular that coupons were already distributed
and available for people regardless of the economic downturn, but it
was obvious that the tragedy of September 11th had stretched to have
its own affect on Dudley Town Common.
What are our vegetables really worth? The monetary value of the
vegetables we sold at the market this season was greater than the
actual money that we collected in cash and coupons. Why was this
so? Shatara explained, “The growers value the vegetables at a higher
price, the real cost of organic vegetables. When we sell the produce at
the market, we sell it for less than its really worth, so that people can
afford it.”
Warren, Ibe, and Alex described the vegetable stats for the season.
After practicing his part studiously, Ibe confidently described the
percentage of each vegetable that was sold over the season and the
remaining percentage that was donated. “Is this a good measure of
vegetable popularity?” The youth were asked, “Aren’t there other factors to be considered?” Warren replied, “The summer vegetables sell
better partially because there are more people at the market during
those weeks.” “Yes,” Alex explained. “But the corn attracts people to
the market. We have more people because there are popular vegetables.” Suggestions arose as to how we could more accurately measure
vegetable salability. We had only taken one of many steps toward a
more thorough analysis of our market vegetables, but that step had
been taken nonetheless.
Michelle, Emma, and Jen described what our customers had to say
about the market. A question came from the audience, “What do you
say to a person who argues that organic produce should be less exHow much can greens weigh?
93
pensive than conventional because you don’t have to add anything to
it? To grow conventional vegetables, you need to buy inputs – chemicals, pesticides, fertilizers.” Michelle didn’t skip a beat, “I would tell
them that it actually takes more work and effort and money to grow
food organically. We can’t just kill bugs and diseases with chemicals
so we need to feed our soil and pick off bugs to make sure that our
plants survive. It takes more time and more careful planning and
more financial investment to be organic farmers.”
Questions were actively shot out and most of the DIRT Crew Members, sitting around the circle, were excited to interject their opinions
based in observation, experience, and an intimate study of the “numbers.” By the time Derry, Jose, and Katie stood up to present the Youth
Analysis, the discussion of what the DIRT Crew thought and felt had
been already been thoroughly touched upon. Although they had spent
two weeks in the summer running the market, five sessions preparing the presentation, many afternoons of compiling information and
creating graphs, the market was still alive for them. It was obvious
in the Analysis Presentation that the market had not been archived in
the DIRT Crew’s minds through graphing and charting quantitative
data, but that it had remained vibrant and alive with many colorful
human faces, lively interactions, and a critical awareness of both the
frustrating and effective systems of its operation.
A couple of different analyses will happen towards the end of the
market season. At the end of the summer program, there will be
an evaluation of all aspects of the program by the staff and leaders.
There will be a section on the Farmers’ Market and you should make a
note to yourself before the analysis if there is anything specific about
the market you would like to have feedback on. This could include
the youth training if you added anything new, the organization of
workers at the market, and so on. Be sure to get a copy of this evaluation for your records.
Youth Analysis
Another evaluation occurs with the youth that have committed to the
Academic Year Program. The Farmers’ Market analysis in the fall is a
major part of their curriculum. See French Fries and the Food System for
the lesson plans for the analysis and see below for a brief description
of the elements involved in the market analysis. 
94
Before planning the fall analysis, however, consider the results from
the past years and how these have informed future markets. Considering the many elements of the market is a lot of work and time. Past
years’ analyses have focused broadly at all the elements of the market
and this broad analysis has been conducted at the expense of a more
detailed study of particular elements. As we become better at running the market, and improving it comes from more detailed tweaking, it may become important to pick a specific aspect of the market
and thoroughly analyze that for the year instead of trying to look at
everything. If we could do a deeper study on advertising and marketing, then we could institute a more effective marketing strategy in
the future.
Developing a Market Survey. A central part of the fall analysis is
surveying the customers at the market. It is important to begin the
surveys as early as possible in the fall to get as many returns as possible and to improve your results. Arrange with the Academic Year
Program Coordinator when you can do the first lesson of the Market
Analysis with the DIRT crew. This first lesson is focused on creating a
survey for the market. It is helpful for the manager to have reviewed
past years’ surveys and results to have an overall sense of the successes and challenges to be learned from. With the youth, however, it is
best to begin by brainstorming about what would be interesting and
useful to know from our customers. After compiling questions from
the brainstorm, have the youth look through the past surveys and see
if they missed anything that might be important to their analysis. Do
not stick to the format, however, if you see a new need or a different
direction in which the survey should go.
Conducting the Survey. The manager will also discuss the methods
with which to deliver the market survey (lesson described in French
Fries and the Food System). When planning for the number of youth
needed to run a fall market, keep in mind that one or two of the youth
should be reserved for giving surveys to customers. A past method
has been to have at least one person doing a survey the whole market with two people during the 4:00 p.m. rush. Halfway through the
market, have the survey person switch with someone who is operating the market. To provide incentives for the youth, try setting up a
competition for who can do the most surveys in a season. Aim for at
least 100 surveys by the end of the market season.
Analyzing the Survey. When the survey is completed and the market
has finished for the season, the main part of the market analysis is
Sunflowers grown in The Food Project’s
greenhouse for sale on our city lot. 
95
conducted. The youth gather the information collected on the surveys
and create charts and graphs to illustrate the results. The objective
is to use customer suggestions, needs, and desires to influence how
we run the market. We need to know convenient market times for
people, what products customers are looking for, what we could do
to improve our service, and many other aspects. We have learned
from previous years that it is important to have the survey available
in several different languages for all of our customers. Additionally, it
may also be advantageous to offer the survey in the summer months
as well as the autumn to get a better idea of what the majority of our
customers want.
Vegetable Analysis. During the market analysis, the youth take time
looking at the vegetable log sheets that they filled out during the
season and the spreadsheets that were created to compile all the information. From these, they graph the amount of poundage coming
in from Lincoln versus that from Boston. They also determine how
much of the produce was sold at the market versus what was donated to the shelters. Last year, the youth conducted a more specific
analysis of which vegetables sold best by tracing each vegetable over
the course of the season to see what sold best. There are many possibilities for deepening and expanding the current vegetable analysis.
The growers might have some input as to information that would be
useful for them to have.
Youth Experience. At the end of each week during the summer program, the youth crews analyze the two markets that they have run.
As has been already discussed, part of their analysis is quantitative
- counting and recording cash, coupons, and customers. The other
part, however, is qualitative, when they reflect on the market systems
from their perspective. Did the market run smoothly? What parts
needed improvement? How was working in pairs? Was there a backlog at the cash register? How can we improve our customer service?
(See Attachment 33: Market Analysis Workshop and Attachment 25:
Accounting Sheet.) Each crew’s reflections are recorded on a flip chart
page to be referred to later. In the fall, the youth in the Academic Year
Program (the DIRT crew) conducts its own qualitative analysis of the
autumn markets. The DIRT crew reviews the reflections from the
seven crews that worked the markets during the summer. Through
compiling their own responses and the reflections of the summer, the
DIRT crew comes up with suggestions for next year’s market.
Attachment 33
Attachment 25
96
Preparing the Market Analysis Presentation. All the steps above
are focused on creating a final presentation that the young people
give to the growers, interested staff, and board members and friends.
During the weeks of the lessons, schedule the DIRT Crew on afternoons during the week to finish the work not completed during
the sessions themselves. In preparing for the overall presentation,
the youth should have access to all the market spreadsheets. These
spreadsheets are the fullest quantitative analysis for the market season. Spend a session preparing the youth for the presentation. (Refer
to Growing Together for guidance on training youth in public speaking
and presentations.)
The Market Analysis Presentation. The final presentation of the
market analysis is an event and should be treated accordingly. Every year the market runs from June through October and has lasting
impacts on the youth, the community, and the neighborhood. The
youth have harvested vegetables, sold them, and then spent many
hours reflecting on the successes and challenges of the market. With
all the effort, thought, and time, it is critical to plan the presentation to
reflect the importance of what the youth have created. In past years,
we have begun or followed the presentation with a shared meal or
other refreshments. The Food Project seeks to involve as many of our
staff, board members, and funders as possible in the final event. By
bringing people together for the analysis, we are able to gather input
both on the results of the analysis and how we came to them. In addition, with an engaged audience, the youth see the importance of their
work in the future of the market. Taking pictures or filming the presentation can create a valuable resource for future market managers
or for use at conferences. The presentation and all of the tools used
throughout the process of the analysis should be used when developing the annual plan for the next year and adding new initiatives to the
Farmers’ Market.
The Marketplace
It was the day after the Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative
(DSNI) Board Election. The DSNI Staff, always great supporters of
The Food Project’s Farmers’ Market, arrived at the market for their
regular visit. Strawberries, snap peas (“just put them in a little bit of
water and then right in the microwave…they are excellent!”), a head 
97
of lettuce, a bunch of beets. They stood, chatting with the youth, asking questions about what vegetable would be ripening next. “When
will tomatoes and corn be brightening your market tables?” During
the lively conversation, several neighborhood women arrived from
St. Patrick’s parish. While deciding between zucchini and patty pan
squash (“is one sweeter than the other?”), both DSNI staff and the St.
Patrick’s entourage reflected upon the event of the night before – the
impressive turnout, the delicious food, and the quality of the Board
candidates.
From behind The Food Project market table, selling her calaloo, mint,
and irises, Sylvia, our neighbor gardener, chimed in to the discussion. She began with stories from a different time, stretching back to
Dudley neighborhood events of 10, 20, 30 years ago. We all listened
attentively to her words, to her particular rendition of the history
of the neighborhood, to her account of the Dudley story. DSNI staff,
neighbors, and The Food Project youth stood quietly, somehow transfixed by the humility and insight of the true tale that she was weaving for us, a story that spoke to the uniqueness of the place where
we all stood, the land that we gardened, the people who worked and
lived around us, the narrow one-way streets that created the map of
the Dudley neighborhood. On that day, in that conversation, in the
midst of fresh, organic vegetables and open minds, time stopped for a
moment.
Only half way through Sylvia’s story did I realize that the exchange
before me was both planned and happenstance. That year, The Food
Project Market on Dudley Town Common was in its fifth year. From
June – October on Tuesdays and Thursdays for all those years, youth
and staff harvested vegetables and fruits, set up tents and tables,
offered fresh produce and resources, and greeted customers. Each
season, we plan, organize, and prepare to carry out this event over 40
times in five months. We do not just happen to be there – we commit
to being there, rain or shine, in sweltering heat or on chilly autumn
days.
The DSNI staff did not just happen to be there that day – they come
by the market nearly every week. They arrive early to get the best variety. They introduce themselves to the youth, and linger to chat with
residents and visitors. The neighborhood women from St. Patrick’s 
98
planned to see the DSNI crew at the market to review the event of the
night before. They had agreed on the market as a “meeting place” to
discuss neighborhood happenings and politics.
Sylvia, our historian, storyteller, and gardener, didn’t just happen to
be at the market either. Multiple years of cultivating relationships
has facilitated connections between The Food Project, neighborhood
gardeners, and the land that has enabled residents to sell their harvest to the community, enriching everyone’s experience of community
and knowledge of farming in urban areas.
The pieces were in place – a park permit, clean and vibrant soil,
beautiful vegetables, an involved and dedicated neighborhood organization, active and concerned neighbors, and interested and motivated youth workers. Yet, conversations such as the one between
DSNI staff, St. Patrick’s parishioners, neighborhood gardeners, and
The Food Project staff and youth, could never be fully orchestrated.
Exchanges such as these that broaden minds to the history of place
and struggle, to change and progress, to evolution and community
are unpredictable and brilliant gifts. And for us at The Food Project,
these conversations that take place near the vegetables that we so
carefully cultivate, with the youth that we so firmly believe in, in a
community that we so excitedly participate in, these are the blessings
of the market place.
How is our Farmers’ Market an expression of our vision – personal
and social change through sustainable agriculture? Certainly, the
market challenges each one of the youth personally - to develop skills
of presentation, customer service, communication, and teamwork.
But is our market also about social change? Historically, societies
that have engaged in vibrant trading of crops at market places have
been more likely to delve into the broader fruits of cultural exchange
– the sharing of languages, culture, religion, literature, and worldviews. While fruits and vegetables were being thrown from ships to
wheelbarrows to be carted to homes around the world, agreements
were formed, wars waged, ideas exchanged, friendships made, minds
stretched and perspectives changed forever. Societies were and are
changed by the interactions that happen in the market place – especially when conversations are sparked by thoughtful, committed,
productive individuals with differing perspectives but similar goals.
Sampling tasty treats at a market
celebration. 
99
The Food Project market on Dudley Town Common run by youth and
adults committed to sustainable growing, environmental stewardship, community involvement and service follows in the ancient market tradition. Here, in this sunny spot in Roxbury, among people from
around the world, an elderly woman tells her story of this particular
place. That conversation - Sylvia’s words, the youth’s questions, the
DSNI staff’s insights, the neighbors’ listening ears – in its simplicity
and directness, amid a table overflowing with color and health, has
the effect of both widening perspectives and shifting thinking, setting
down the seeds for the powerful connections that do nothing less than
lead to true transformation of people, neighborhoods, and societies. 
Attachment 1
Directions to the Dudley Town Common Farmers’ Market
From Ruggles MBTA Station or Dudley Station:
Take Bus 15 to Upham’s Corner or Bus 45 to Blue Hill Ave. Both buses go
directly by the market, which is on the corner of Blue Hill Avenue and Dudley St.
Landmarks include a large circular clock in front of the market site, Nuestra
Communidad, and St. Patrick’s Church. If you are on Bus 15, you get off on
Dudley St. and if you are on Bus 45, you will get off on Blue Hill Ave.
From Upham’s Corner:
Take 15 toward Dudley Station and get off the bus at the intersection of Blue Hill Ave
and Dudley St. The market site is on your left.
From Mass Pike (Rt. 90):
Take Mass Pike East all the way under Boston until it connects to Interstate 93. Take 93
South, then:
From 93S/Fitzgerald Expressway:
Take Exit 18 Mass Ave/Roxbury. At the bottom of the Exit, turn right and continue
straight to light at Mass Ave. Turn left onto Mass Ave (gas station on your right.) Then:
From Mass Ave.
Take Mass Ave south from Boston (away from Charles river). Continue past the turn off
to 93 Expressway, stay to right at blinking yellow light. Turn right at next light
(Magazine St.). Go straight on Magazine St. until it dead ends at Dudley Street. The
Farmers’ Market will be right in front of you at the corner of Dudley St. and Blue Hill
Ave.
Attachment 2
Dexter Miller
Boston Parks and Recreation
1010 Massachusetts Avenue, Third Floor
Roxbury, MA 02118
Dear Dexter Miller:
I am writing to request a permit from the Boston Park and Recreation Commission for
the use of park space at Dudley Town Commons, Roxbury (Blue Hill Ave. and Dudley
Street). For the past several years you have granted The Food Project use of this space
for our Farmers’ Market held from June until late October. We have obtained approval
from the Dudley Town Commons Advisory Committee (contact individual: Liza Veras)
to operate the Market on this site on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 3:30 to 7:30 (this
includes setup and take down- actual mkt. operation is from 4-7pm) and have been
included in their Park use plan.
Last year was another successful year for our Farmers’ Market with the inclusion of
another farmer, Drumlin Farm, which added variety and vitality to the market
operation. The successful use of this park space has been evident to all in the
community and is reflected in the number of residents we serve. In the summer of 1999,
we provided fresh vegetables and fruits to a total of 1700 customers at our Thursday
market. We look forward to offering high quality locally grown vegetables and fruits to
Roxbury residents at the same site again this year.
Produce for sale at the Market comes from The Food Project's Summer Youth Program
where fifty teens from Roxbury and greater Boston grow vegetables on farms inside and
outside the city. This year in addition to produce, customers will have access to
nutrition information as well as organic gardening information.
Nearby businesses have expressed their support for the Market and say they see
increased business activity during its operation. We hope to continue this mutually
beneficial relationship in the community.
 We look forward to working with the Parks Department to make the Market a success
in 2000. We welcome your questions and guidance about the use of this space and as we
get closer, I will send over some flyers and information for your office.
Sincerely,
Sara Coblyn
Market Manager
Attachment 3
June 10, 1999
Joseph Kelly
City of Boston, Dept. of Transportation
City Hall, Rm. 721
Boston, MA 02201
Dear Mr. Kelly,
Thank you for speaking with me yesterday regarding the use of
Parking Lot #27, Blue Hill Ave., Roxbury. I am following up with a
written request to utilize this parking lot for our Farmers' Market, each
Thursday afternoon (June-October), from 4:00 PM to 7:00 PM.
In the past we have had difficulty accommodating customers who
drive by the market, due to the high need for parking in this business
area. I am unsure of the current use of Lot #27 during the high traffic
hours, but assume that it provides customers with the parking they
need to patron area businesses. These relationships with area
businesses are extremely important to us and vital to the future use of
park space in this area for our farmers' market. Throughout this
process, we would hope to maintain these relationships.
We hope that sharing or full use of this lot would allow us to serve
more customers and add to the overall patronage of all stores. We
currently have a "Parking" sandwich board and cones that could be
used to designate the parking area for market parking. If your
department requires any other signage or structures, we would be
more than glad to follow your guidelines. Thank you again for your
time. I look forward to speaking with you soon regarding this request.
Regards,
Colleen O'Brien, Market Manager
The Food Project, P.O. Box 705, Lincoln, MA 01773
Phone: 617.442.1322 or Voicemail: 781.259.8621
Attachment 4 Farmers' Market Inventory
Name of Item Current # Optimal # Current Condition Maintenance Recommendation Intials
Bags, clear produce low 1 lug full Check budget to purchase in bulk/donations Baheem
Bags, handle low 2 lugs full Check budget/request donations
Banner 2 2 ok check for decal that is not sticking
Baskets-1/2 bushel 8 10 ok Reorder through New England Basket Co.
Baskets-bushel 10 10 ok Reorder through New England Basket Co.
Baskets-random 12 10 ok
Metal Bins 4 5 one is broken Buy a couple more to display veggies-wash and check
Broom/Dustpan 2 2 ok You may want to locate push broom
Calculator 2 2 For use during accounting lesson
Calculator w/tape 0 8 For use with cash register- one per youth
Cash box 2 2 ok
Cash register 0 2 Need to go over cash register plan with business manager
Chef Demonstration Supplied by Chef
Cups, water 0 Couple Packs Encourage youth to use water bottles
Dry Erase Cleaner 0 Couple bottles
Duct tape half roll 4
Extension Cord-orange 2 2 Check with urban ag.
Hanging Scale dials 5 5 plastic shield/glass broken Check rim- okay for glass to be missing for
Hot plate 1 1 good consistently check to make sure works
Markers, Dry Erase 0 2
Markers, Permanent 0 20
Nightly Deposit items 0 Set up if necessary
Notebook Kept on site Contains sales logs, accounting sheets, invoices
Paint Stirrer 40+ 60+ Used for Produce Tags, ok
Paper towels half roll several rolls
pens/pencils 10 100
Produce Tags 40+ 60+ dirty, missing vegetables Make new ones for all produce, bilingual
Receipt pin 1 2 For holding receipts, also can put them under cash drawer
Rubber bands half bag 2 bags For bunching veggies, flowers
Sales bibs 4 15 ok Need to be washed/bought at Home Depot
Sales books whole box a box Keep an eye on this and reorder with office manager
Sandwich Board, Little 1 1 or 2 okay Little one- can be used to pin a sign onto it
Sandwich Board, Big 2 2 ok needs repainting
Scale-100 lb. 4 oz 1 1 Hold by bottom or dial will pop out
Scissors 2 2
Scoops 5 5 ok Assign each scoop to dial for inspection
Signs 2 2 or 3 FP Mission & Availability Board is broken/needs new laminate
Small stool 1 1 ok Needs to be scrubbed, used for elders
Spray bottles 4 5 ok Clean/Buy at Home Depot
Staple Gun/staples 1 1 ok
Stapler/staples 1 1
Tableclothes 2 4 ok Depends on table size
Tables, Small 8 8 3 in good repair Try to fix or trash and just use longer tables
Tent, Repair Kit 1 bag 1 bag
Tents 4 4 ok Two white tents sturdy, use first, other two work- gentle
Tools, general 2 2 Hammer, screwdriver, wrench, plyers
Trash liners 1 2
Twine 1 2
Water jug 1 1 or 2 ok One at market good mostly, two in hot weather
Wooden Veggie Bin 1 1 ok Replace plastic liner/screw in divider
c
Attachment 5
Chris Mesarch
Fresh Pond Bread & Circus
200 Alewife Brook Pkwy.
Cambridge, MA 02138
Dear Chris,
Thanks for speaking with me regarding the potential donation of some
produce and grocery bags for the Dudley Town Common and Codman
Square Food Project Farmers' Markets. I am following up on our
conversation with this written request to clarify some of the supply
needs around the markets.
In the past we have received bag donations from a variety of local
markets in the area. We have not given special attention to
relationship building around these requests because we felt lucky to
get whatever they had to offer us. My newest commitment, as Market
Manager, is to share our mission with donors a little more, so that they
can understand just how valuable and special their donation is to our
programming and enterprise operations. It has been great working
with folks at Bread & Circus because we have similar commitments to
our customers, farmers, and communities. It would be a treat to send
customers home with fresh vegetables in Bread & Circus bags!
We have had two types of bags at our markets in the past: the clear
produce bags that come in rolls and the plastic bags with handles.
Any bags would help the cause, but these are the easiest to handle and
the most practical for our market. The farmers' market begins June
17th and will continue until October, but I expect to ask for donations
from several other stores, if you are unable to supply us with a large
supply of bags. Any donation that seems feasible for Bread & Circus
is great for us!
Thanks for your consideration, Chris, and your continued commitment
to us. Everyone at The Food Project appreciates your efforts. Happy
late spring! If you have any interest in visiting a market, please let me
know...we could always use professional feedback on our business! I
will follow up soon.
Regards,
Colleen O'Brien
Market Manager, 617.442-1322 or voicemail 781.259.8621.
Attachment 6-1
1999 Dudley Town Commons Farmers' Market
Site use for Dudley Town Common, South
Roxbury, Massachusetts
Market Organizer
The Food Project, Inc.
Contact: Colleen O'Brien 781.259.8621 (x20)
Neighborhood Advisory Committee
DSNI, Dudley Town Commons Advisory Committee
Contact: Liza Veras, 617.442.9670
Park Site
PLACE: Dudley Town Common South @ Blue Hill Ave. and Dudley St., Roxbury
DATES: Thursdays from June 17 through late October
TIME: 4 pm to 7 pm market (Set-up at 3 pm and Clean-up until 7:30 pm)
VENDORS: 3 Area Farmers; 2 Neighborhood Growers; 2-5 Local Chefs
Products Sold
Home grown fresh produce, flowers, herbs, honey, eggs, and baked goods.
Activities Planned
Throughout the market season, we will highlight healthy food, people, and environment. This
may include a health fair, blood pressure screenings, physical fitness testing, line-dancing,
nutrition talks, sale of organic garden amendments, cooking demonstrations, urban ecology,
gardening, art activities for children, and recycling demonstrations.
We hope to offer presentations by local youth on organic methods of growing food, and invite
other youth groups doing theater, dance, music, art, singing, and writing.
Site Use and Visual Impact
Displays
Farmers and Growers will set-up sales displays on the tiers of the South Town Commons.
Most farmers erect a free-standing tent and tables near their produce truck or van. The Food
Project will provide Neighborhood Gardeners space within our sales area as adjunct vendors.
Attachment 6-2
Water
We recommend that vendors provide their own water for drinking, cleaning produce, etc.
Electricity
We hope to get access to electricity on this site for cooking, music, dance, etc.
Trash
We and other vendors will clean our sales areas following the Market and haul garbage out
with us.
Parking: Customers have access to the city lot across the street on Blue Hill or around the
corner on Dudley St. Aeromatic Janitorial Supply next door has also approved use of their lot
after business hours.
Promotion and Advertising
Department of Food and Agriculture
As an established market with the DFA, we are included in their yearly brochure and
marketing campaign.
Farmers Market Coupons
Nuestra Comunidad distributes Farmers' Markets coupons to residents in the Market area.
WIC Programs and Neighborhood Health Centers receive mailings to inform their
clients/patients about our offerings and location.
Local Businesses
Express support for the Market and will display our poster in their windows. We hope to
have several participate or sponsor events.
Local Media
We place notices in community calendars of local papers and radio and advertise in several
languages in our flyers to let people know about the work of the Food Project and the
existence of this Farmers' Market. There will be a big push in 1999 to invite local residents to
the market on a weekly basis via distribution of flyers. 
 The Food Project Office
(617) 442-1322
WIC and Farmers’
Market Coupons!
 Dudley Town Common
Farmers’ Market
Na Merkadu di Kanpunes
El Mercado de Cultivadores
Corner of Blue Hill Ave and Dudley St., Roxbury
Tuesdays and Thursdays, 4-7 PM
June - October 2001
Fresh, Delicious and Affordable!
Attachment 7
Por mas información:
 The Food Project Office
(617) 442-1322
Compre en el Mercado en
Dudley Town
Los Martes y Jueves de 4-7 de la tarde
Junio - Octubre, 2001
Seguros ~ cultivados sin pesticidos quimicos
Localmente ~ crecidos por los jovenes de la region
Frescos ~ cosechados y vendidos el mismo dia
¡Que Fresco!
En la esquina de la Avenida Blue Hill y Calle Dudley,
Roxbury
Aceptamos WIC !
Attachment 8
For More Information:
Call The Food Project Office
(617) 442-1322
Fresh Convenient Affordable
Enjoy the Harvest
Dudley Town Common
WIC Coupons Gladly Accepted!
Farmers’ Market
This flyer allows for the purchase of $5
worth of vegetables, bread, and fruit at
our market!
June - October, 2002
 Tuesdays & Thursdays, 4 PM - 7 PM
Corner of Dudley and Blue Hill Ave., Roxbury
$ 5
$ 5
Attachment 9
Attachment 10
May 18, 2000
Calendar Director
Bay State Banner
Boston, MA
Fax 542-7119
Dear Director,
Thank you for listing this announcement in the calendar section of the Bay State
Banner. The farm season has just begun and it is an exciting time to be offering
fresh produce to the residents here in Roxbury and Dorchester. This year we will
be running two farmers’ markets at the Dudley Town Common in Roxbury on
Tuesdays and Thursdays from 4 to 7 PM. If you could run this announcement
for two weeks, that would be great!
Sara Coblyn
The Food Project
781-259-8621
ANNOUNCEMENT FOR CALENDAR SECTION
OF THE BAY STATE BANNER
Come buy locally grown and fresh produce at The Dudley Town
Common Farmers’ Market in Roxbury. Grown by youth from your
community on farms in your community!
The Farmers’ at Dudley Town Common
The corner of Blue Hill and Dudley in Roxbury
Tuesdays and Thursdays, 4:00 – 7:00 PM
Begins June 1, 2000 through October
For more information,
Contact The Food Project, Sara Coblyn, 781-259-8621 Ext.36
Attachment 11
May 31, 2000
Greater Boston Radio Group
PSA for The Food Project
Fax 617-822-6759
The Dudley Town Common farmers' market operated by The Food Project is an
ongoing event that begins on Thursday, June 1, 2000 and runs through October.
If you could run this PSA as soon as possible, that would be great. If possible, it
would be helpful to run the PSA again in a couple of weeks as the season
progresses.
Thanks,
Sara Coblyn
Farmers' Market Manager 781-259-8621
PSA
The Food Project, a local non- profit youth development and sustainable
agriculture organization is now beginning its fifth season at the Dudley Town
Common Farmers' Market in Roxbury. The market runs on Tuesdays and
Thursdays from 4 to 7 PM and will have a variety of organic and locally grown
fruits and vegetables as well as transplants, honey, eggs and baked goods.
Located at the corner of Blue Hill and Dudley St. in Roxbury across from St.
Patrick's Church, on bus lines 15 and 45. Begins June 1 and runs through
October. Come to the market and support our local farmers, support our young
people that run the market and put your money back into the local community! 
Attachment 12
March 29, 1999
Dear Director,
Happy Spring from all of the staff at The Food Project! As we plow
our fields to prepare them for spring planting, I wanted to touch base
with you regarding the approaching farmers' market season. For
seven years, The Food Project has run a successful farmers' market at
Dudley Town Common in Roxbury, providing fresh, organic produce
to residents of the neighborhood. Farmers' Market and WIC coupons
from your distribution centers account for over 60% of our sales each
season and we want to continue to provide residents with information
about our markets at Dudley Town Common. This year we will be
running two markets at the Common, on Tuesday and Thursday.
Last year, we designed a flyer for WIC Directors to include in the
summer coupon packets for coupon recipients, and are hoping to do so
again this year. We would like to include you in this distribution, if
you are interested. If this is not possible, I would love to hear of other
suggestions that might allow people better access to information about
the market. I will follow up with you next week regarding the
possibility of this collaboration. Thank you for your time. Enjoy the
beautiful weather!
Warm regards,
Colleen O'Brien
Market Staff
(781) 259-8621
Attachment 13
June 1, 1999
Dear WIC Director,
Thank you for distributing these flyers to recipients of WIC and
Farmers' Market coupons for the summer season! We are excited to
kick-off our fourth season at the Dudley Town Common, Roxbury. We
hope that residents will visit the markets each week to share in the
harvest. Remember that we will be doing two markets at the common,
one on Tuesday and one on Thursday.
We will have plenty of fruits, vegetables, meats, and breads at the
market this year as well as chefs, nutritionists, and farmers on staff to
share their expertise on the value of locally grown and fresh produce.
I have enclosed flyers as well as an original, in case you need to run
more copies (Please contact me, if you would like us to send more
flyers to you. We would be glad to do this).
Good luck with your work in the coming months. Please call Colleen
O'Brien, if you have questions or concerns about the flyers. Thanks
again!
Regards,
Colleen O'Brien
Dudley Town Common Market Manager
617-442-1322 or Voicemail 781-259-8621
For More Information:
Call The Food Project Office
(617) 442-1322
Fresh
Dudley Town Common
Farmers’ Market
June - October, 2001
 Tuesdays & Thursdays, 4 PM - 7 PM
Corner of Dudley and Blue Hill Ave., Roxbury
WIC Coupons Gladly Accepted!
Everyone Welcome!
FIRST MARKET : JUNE 7th
Convenient
Affordable
Attachment 14
Attachment 15-1
March 9, 2000
Dear Potential Vendor:
Happy New Year! I hope it has been a good transition for you and you are
looking forward to the 2000 growing season with anticipation.
The Dudley Town Commons Farmers' Market is a vibrant market in Roxbury
that has been run by The Food Project on Thursdays from 4-7pm since 1996.
Each year our continued presence and outreach efforts have grown this market
consistently. In 2000, our presence will be further increased with the addition of
another market at the same site on Tuesdays also from 4-7pm. I would like to
invite you to participate in one or both of these markets for the 2000 season. This
will be an exciting year with the addition of the second market as well as other
developments including the sale of fresh products and salsa at our market and
an increase in the number of festivals and community wide events at the market.
Hopefully, you will be able to attend and add to this diversity.
The Food Project is a youth development organization that brings together
young people of diverse backgrounds to grow and distribute food in greater
Boston, practicing care for land and community. Through farming, we teach
youth critical lessons about diversity, service, self-discipline, small business
skills, and the environment. Our youth learn to farm on our 21-acre farm in
Lincoln and 2 acre urban agriculture sites in Roxbury. They then follow the seed
to the market as our youth participants sell the food they grew at the Dudley
Town Commons Farmers' Market. Through structured training sessions, our
young people learn to be professionals as they sell at this market.
The Dudley Town Common site is at the center of the Dudley neighborhood.
The location is highly visible and busy (as it is a bus stop for folks on public
transportation and a throughway for folks in cars) and the site is large enough
for several booths. Public parking is also available.
The Food Project has a strong commitment to the Roxbury community and is
involved in a grassroots effort began several years ago to transform this
neighborhood. And it is happening. The community is changing; there is an
increase in jobs, housing and community programs and the movement of young
professionals into this area. Development is happening in Dudley Square,
increasing the amount of businesses there. The Dudley Town Common Farmers'
Market is part of this effort and has grown consistently over the last four years
with locally grown produce sold by The Food Project, two area farmers, and one
neighborhood gardener. We have regular customers from the neighborhood and
newcomers each week. It's a friendly market, with our youth participants
engaging in warm conversations with residents about the produce, the weather,
and the community. Please think about joining this venture as it continues to
grow with this unique community of people.
Attachment 15-2
We need to know ahead of time who will be participating in the market so that
we can best organize space and parking availability at the Town Commons.
Therefore, please review the enclosed information and submit an application, if
you are interested.
I hope you consider trying out this exciting marketplace. There is truly no other
experience like that of selling at a vibrant market with people of diverse
backgrounds, with young people at the center of it all, learning valuable job skills
as well as the importance of supporting locally produced food.
I would be happy to talk further about our market and its location with you and
share our sales records if that would help with your decision process. Also, on
the application are a couple of options for your participation including a festival
day in late summer. We very much hope to hear from you soon and wish you
the best in your enterprise. Please don't hesitate to call me.
Warm regards,
Sara Coblyn
Market Manager
617-442-1322
(781) 259-8621
Encl.: Information for Vendors
Vendor Application
Attachment 16-1
2000 Vendor Application & Guidelines
The Dudley Town Common Farmers' Market
Roxbury, MA
Application Due Date: April 20, 2000
Vendor Information
Name of Vendor:
Vendor Contact Person:
Name of Business/Farm/Garden (if applicable):
Mailing Address:
Work Phone: Home Phone:
Emergency Contact Name and Phone #:
______________________________________________________
Site Plans and Needs
Size of Market Stand/Area needed to sell:
Infrastructure Needs (i.e.. electricity, water):
Market Crops for 2000 Season Expected Harvest Date
Intentions for Promotion, if any:
Attachment 16-2
Information for Market Management in 2000
We want to make the market an exciting and profitable experience for every
vendor who comes to Dudley Town Common, Roxbury. Please answer all
the questions below. Applications are due April 20, 2000.
Can you attend for the full market season? Can you attend the first market,
June 1?
Specify whether you will be attending the Tuesday or Thursday market or
both.
Can we use your name and/or business name when advertising the market?
Are you selling at any other farmers' markets in the City?
What method do you use for pricing your produce/food items?
Do you have any obstacles for selling at the market (i.e.. do not have a scale,
table, cash box etc.)?
If you cannot be a continual vendor would you be interested in:
• Attending our "Celebration of local food and farming" event on August
17?
• Selling a certain amount of your product to The Food Project for resale?
If yes, would you be able to deliver to our Lincoln farm?
Thank you!
Sara Coblyn
Market Manager
Attachment 17
May 20, 2002
John Smith
Dorchester Bay CDC
594 Columbia Road, Suite 302
Dorchester, MA 02125
Dear John:
Greetings from The Food Project!
This letter is to announce the coming opening of our farmers’ market in
the first week of June. The market has been run for the past six seasons
and is located on the Dudley Town Common (the corner of Blue Hill
Avenue and Dudley Street in Roxbury). It runs on Tuesday and Thursday
afternoons from 4:00pm-7:00pm, June through late October. We would
love to talk with you about ways to generate more local interest and
participation in the market.
One way to build awareness of local food would be to have our youth
make a presentation about the market to your residents sometime in June,
whether at a meeting or another event. I look forward to hearing from
you when such a gathering will be taking place. In the meantime, I am
enclosing some flyers that you can post to inform residents about the
market. Thanks very much.
Best Regards,
Kristin Brennan
Market Manager
617-442-1322 x12
Attachment 18-1
Elder Pickup Schedule and Route
Tuesdays between 4:00 and 4:30:
1. Council Towers
Directions to Council Towers, 2875 Washington St., Roxbury
Contact: Frances Sligh, 442-3081
From Smith House on Ruggles, cross Shawmut and follow Ruggles to the intersection with
Washington Street. Take a right onto Washington St.. Go straight through the intersection of
Dudley and Washington, and follow street up a gradual hill. After passing through the
intersection of M.L. King and Washington (there is a light there), you will see a light ahead (the
intersection of Washington and Marcella). Go straight. Council Towers is on the right just after
this intersection.
To return to market: Take a left back onto Washington and follow to Dudley. Take a right on
Dudley.
2. Garrison Apartments
Directions to Garrison Apartments, 60 Brookledge St., Dorchester
Contact: Minnie Simmons, 442-3059
From Council Towers, continue on Washington to the intersection of Washington and Columbus.
Take a left (a very busy intersection, be careful) and continue straight. At some point Columbus
turns into Seaver, so don't be startled that you've taken a wrong turn. Just continue on. You will
eventually see Elm Hill Ave. on your left. Take a left onto Elm Hill Ave. and an immediate left
onto Brookledge. 60 Brookledge is on the right, brick building, and you can pull into the parking
lot on the right.
To return to market: Go to the end of the straight of Brookledge. Take a right onto Humboldt.
Follow to M.L. King. Take a right onto M.L. King and then a left onto Warren. Follow Warren to
Moreland. Take a right onto Moreland. At the end, take a left onto Blue Hill. Market is on the
right.
Thursdays between 4:00 and 4:30
1. Robert Fortes House
Directions to Robert Fortes House, 541 Shawmut Ave., Roxbury
Contact: Rosetta Peele, #308, 262-2114 or 267-8339
From the market site, take Dudley St. back toward Dudley Station. Just before the Bus Station,
take a right onto Warren Street. It quickly turns into Washington St. moments later. Follow this
to Melnea Cass. Take a left on Melnea Cass and then a right onto Tremont. At the 
Attachment 18-2
intersection of Mass. Ave. and Tremont, take a right onto Mass. Ave. Take a right onto Shawmut
Ave. Moments later you will see a light at the intersection of Shawmut and Northhampton.
Robert Fortes House is located just before that light on the right.
Smith House
Directions to Smith House, 122 Dewitt Dr., Roxbury
Contact: Pauline Sheridan, 427-9242
From Robert Fortes House, follow Shawmut (one way) to Melnea Cass. Cross through the Melnea
Cass/Shawmut intersection to the next set of lights. Go straight through this next intersection
(Ruggles and Shawmut) and take your first right onto Estabrook Rd. Circle around the block to
the end and make a right onto Dewitt Dr and then a right again onto Ruggles. The front door of
the Smith House is on the right (big brick building. Park beside the handicap ramp.
To return to market: Take Ruggles to Washington. Take a right on Washington and a left on
Dudley. 
The Food Project, 555 Dudley St.,
Dorchester, MA; (617) 442-1322
Delicious veggies, fruits, and bread!
Fresh, local, and low-prices
Dudley Town Common
Farmers’ Market
June - October, 2001
 Tuesdays & Thursdays, 4 PM - 7 PM
Corner of Dudley and Blue Hill Ave., Roxbury
Hey Kids! Tell your parents!
WIC Coupons Accepted
Attachment 19
Attachment 20
Market Visit Question Sheet
Read the following questions as you ride in the van to the farmers’ market. Add any
other questions you might be curious about. Be prepared to observe people, set-up, and
products at the market. Respectfully ask questions of vendors, customers, and the
market manager. At the end, you will report back to your fellow crewmembers about
what you observed and learned. From these observations, your crew may suggest
certain changes to the staff for the market.
Questions about Display and Product:
- At this market, how are the vegetables displayed?
- Is this market set up any different than ours? If so, in what ways?
- In which ways does this market differ from ours? Do they sell items that we do not?
- Compare the way that we display our fruits and vegetables to the way that this market is
displayed? Is the goal of the market to have the items look pretty or to just have the items on
the table so that they can be seen by customers?
Questions about Prices and Customers:
- Investigate the prices at the market. Are they higher or lower than ours? If they are higher,
why so you think so? Think about those who live in the area and the economic situation of
people in the area.
- Did you see any WIC or Farmers’ Market coupons being used? If not, why?
- How would you describe some of the people that you saw purchasing products at the market?
(Consider race, culture, age, economic class)
Questions for Farmers’ and Vendors:
- Are all the vegetables at this market organic? If they are not, why do you think that pesticides
are used?
- Where are all these vegetables grown? (This is a good question to ask the vendors.
Attachment 21
Set- Up List and Sequence
There are two set up teams, each led by a leader. The market manager oversees
both groups. One group sets up the tents and tables (Assistant Leader plus 4),
the other is the advertising group (Leader plus 4).
1. Everyone unloads the van. Get the tents and tables out first.
2. Tents/Tables group focuses on unloading the tents and tables. When all the
tents are out, that group starts to set up the tents while the other group
continues to unload everything. Set up the tents so that the middle of them is
in line with the black light pole. (We need to leave room for the tables and
space behind the tables to work.)
3. Advertising group continues to unload the van and put everything neatly
behind the tents.
-2 people set up banner on clock
-1 person brings sandwich board in front of clock facing road
-Once tents are up, hang scales, chalkboard, hang bags and set up
bin with rest of bags in center of stand, behind tables
-Prop other signs against tent poles
4. Tents/Table group moves to display. Make it pretty, simple and clean!
-Set up tables
-Left table is greens with metal bins with water for greens
-Make sure all overstock is under the table that the vegetable is on
and all veggies are in the shade.
5. Advertising group
-Puts signs on vegetables
-Gets out receipt pads and pens for everyone
6. 4:00 Market starts. Make sure in weights are done. If there is anyone
handing out flyers, they leave with the crew leader. They come back in 30
minutes and rotate with another pair who goes in a different direction.
7. Halfway through the market when it is slow (5:45) the leader manages dinner
shifts. Youth must either go sit in the pizza place or come back and sit in the
grassy area behind the common. They must not sit near the young people
who are operating the market to prevent distractions.
Location: The Food Project Farmers' Market Sales Log
Vegetable/Type L/Quantity R/Quantity L/In R/In Total End
Quantity End Weight Amount
Sold Price
Basil
Beans, Bush Fr.
Beans, Bush Snap
Beans, Shell
Beets
Bok Choy
Broccoli
Brussels' Sprouts
Cabbage, Green
Cabbage, Red
Cantaloupe
Carrot
Cauliflower
Celeriac
Chard, Swiss
Cilantro
Collards
Corn, Sweet
Corn, Pop
Cucumber, Pick.
Attachment 22
Location: The Food Project Farmers' Market Sales Log Date:
Vegetable/Type L/Quantity R/Quantity L/In R/In Total End
Quantity End Weight Amount
Sold Price
Cucumber, Slic.
Daikon
Dill
Eggplant
Fennel
Garlic
Kale
Leeks
Lettuce, Head
Lettuce, Loose
Melon, Water
Mustard Greens
Onions
Parsnip
Peas, Shell
Peas, Snap
Peas, Snow
Pepper, Bell
Pepper, Multi
Pepper, Hot
Attachment 23
Potato
Location: The Food Project Farmers' Market Sales Log Date:
Vegetable/Type L/Quantity R/Quantity L/In R/In Total End
Quantity End Weight Amount
Sold
C
o Price Final $
Potato, Sweet
Radish
Rutabaga
Salad Mix
Scallions
Spinach
Squash, Patty
Squash, Yellow
Squash, Zucchini
Squash, Winter
Strawberry
Tomato, Cherry
Tomato, Plum
Tomato, Slicing
Turnip
Tomatillo
Okra
Celery
Soybeans
Turnip Greens
Mustard Greens
Beet Greens
Parsley
Watermelon
Flowers
Attachment 24
 Location: The Food Project Farmers' Market Accounting Sheet Date:
WIC Coupons x 2.50= $
FM $2.50 Coupons x 2.50= $
FM $1.00 Coupons x 1= $ CLOSING BALANCE $
FP Coupons x 5= $ OPENING BALANCE — $
Cash Total $ COSTS/OVERHEAD — $
Change Total + $ TOTAL NET INCOME =
CLOSING BALANCE
 Cashbox Start $
OPENING BALANCE
Costs $ # of Customers:
Costs $ Name of Crew:
Costs $ Bookkeepers:
Attachment 25
COSTS/OVERHEAD Intern Initials:
Attachment 26 Farmers' Markets
Statistical Summary
Market
Number date
Total #
Received
Total #
Donated
Total # Sold
Total $
Received
Total $
Donated
Total $ Sold
1 6/7/01 136.5 68 68.5 $157.00 $76.25 $80.75
2 6/12/01 109 45 64 $150.75 $30.75 $120.00
3 6/14/01 139 62 44 $168.50 $58.75 $109.75
4 6/19/01 226 93 133 $308.50 $85.00 $223.50
5 6/21/01 193.25 76 117.5 $191.25 $51.00 $140.25
6 6/26/01 353.5 103 250.5 $366.25 $112.00 $254.25
7 6/28/01 487 250.5 226.5 $606.50 $194.25 $412.25
8 7/3/01 430.5 142.5 288 $424.50 $152.25 $272.25
9 7/5/01 910.5 790 120.25 $615.87 $271.50 $344.37
10 7/10/01 489.5 219 272.5 $718.00 $134.50 $583.50
11 7/12/01 693.25 193 500.25 $699.00 $181.00 $518.00
12 7/17/01 602.75 190 412.75 $640.00 $185.75 $454.25
13 7/19/01 513 33 492 $599.25 $27.00 $572.25
14 7/24/01 797.5 228 579.5 $854.25 $252.00 $602.25
15 7/26/01 703.5 217 486.5 $844.50 $231.50 $613.00
16 7/31/01 995.5 267 728.5 $1,102.75 $270.00 $832.75
17 8/2/01 1632 221.5 1410.5 $1,425.25 $246.25 $1,179.00
18 8/7/01 1194 396 850 $1,348.25 $368.00 $980.25
19 8/9/01 1537.5 187 1350.5 $1,650.50 $189.50 $1,461.00
20 8/14/01 1868.5 909.75 958.75 $1,745.25 $631.00 $1,114.25
21 8/16/01 2836.5 646 2190.5 $1,742.25 $574.00 $1,168.25
22 8/21/01 2845 826 2019 $2,189.75 $687.00 $1,502.75
23 8/23/01 3954.5 1120 2834.5 $2,515.50 $1,126.00 $1,389.50
24 8/28/01 2452.5 512 1940.5 $1,787.75 $515.00 $1,272.75
25 8/30/01 2358 304 2054 $1,507.25 $316.00 $1,191.25
26 9/4/01 1442 453 989 $1,492.75 $455.00 $1,037.75
27 9/6/01 2096 192.5 1903.5 $1,448.25 $204.50 $1,243.75
28 9/11/01 221 221 0 $230.75 $230.75 $0.00
29 9/13/01 1232 256 975.5 $1,051.50 $259.50 $792.00
30 9/18/01 2582 367.5 2214.5 $2,026.00 $347.00 $1,679.00
31 9/20/01 1159 402 757 $1,025.25 $356.50 $668.75
32 9/25/01 1044 239 805 $1,021.25 $256.50 $764.75
33 9/27/01 818.1 250 568.1 $816.50 $273.00 $543.50
34 10/2/01 981.5 255 726.5 $827.50 $252.75 $574.75
35 10/4/01 759.25 306 453.25 $721.75 $314.00 $407.75
36 10/9/01 846.5 227 619.5 $765.50 $237.50 $528.00
37 10/11/01 696 95.2 600.8 $648.00 $102.90 $545.10
38 10/16/01 631.5 219 412.5 $645.13 $229.00 $416.13
39 10/18/01 520 127 393 $511.00 $123.00 $388.00
40 10/23/01 734 294.75 439.25 $651.50 $334.00 $317.50
41 10/25/01 446.5 45 401.5 $404.75 $50.50 $354.25
42 10/30/01 1606.5 300 1306.5 $926.75 $75.00 $851.75
TOTALS 46275 12349 33958 $39,572.75 $11,067.65 $28,505.10
Market Receipts Attachment 27
data entry data entry data entry
Market
Number date Total Cash % of Mkt Sales
In cash Total Coupons
% of Mkt
Sales in
Coupons
Total Received
Number of
Market
Customers
1 6/7/01 $43.00 95% $2.50 5% $45.50 13
2 6/12/01 $95.00 86% $15.00 14% $110.00 18
3 6/14/01 $103.00 77% $30.00 23% $133.00 21
4 6/19/01 $109.00 78% $30.00 22% $139.00 30
5 6/21/01 $112.00 92% $10.00 8% $122.00 36
6 6/26/01 $156.00 78% $45.00 22% $201.00 55
7 6/28/01 $126.00 54% $107.50 46% $233.50 42
8 7/3/01 $179.45 75% $60.00 25% $239.45 61
9 7/5/01 $116.50 77% $35.00 23% $151.50 32
10 7/10/01 $138.00 69% $62.50 31% $200.50 60
11 7/12/01 $187.44 60% $125.00 40% $312.44 82
12 7/17/01 $160.00 52% $145.00 48% $305.00 72
13 7/19/01 $246.50 48% $270.00 52% $516.50 124
14 7/24/01 $258.44 48% $280.00 52% $538.44 97
15 7/26/01 $316.00 54% $265.00 46% $581.00 131
16 7/31/01 $312.00 48% $342.50 52% $654.50 108
17 8/2/01 $360.00 43% $482.50 57% $842.50 135
18 8/7/01 $214.00 36% $375.00 64% $589.00 111
19 8/9/01 $236.00 46% $277.50 54% $513.50 123
20 8/14/01 $357.00 44% $452.50 56% $809.50 183
21 8/16/01 $430.00 48% $462.50 52% $892.50 172
22 8/21/01 $215.00 40% $322.00 60% $537.00 160
23 8/23/01 $212.30 24% $682.50 76% $894.80 152
24 8/28/01 $283.50 37% $477.50 63% $761.00 143
25 8/30/01 $313.90 35% $587.50 65% $901.40 188
26 9/4/01 $144.00 37% $247.50 63% $391.50 95
27 9/6/01 $346.00 52% $322.50 48% $668.50 168
28 9/11/01 $0.00 0% $0.00 0% $0.00 0
29 9/13/01 $323.50 55% $265.00 45% $588.50 128
30 9/18/01 $190.45 33% $395.00 67% $585.45 124
31 9/20/01 $230.65 38% $376.50 62% $607.15 112
32 9/25/01 $43.05 12% $312.50 88% $355.55 70
33 9/27/01 $217.20 46% $260.00 54% $477.20 101
34 10/2/01 $37.00 14% $235.00 86% $272.00 65
35 10/4/01 $87.15 25% $266.50 75% $353.65 65
36 10/9/01 $71.00 25% $217.50 75% $288.50 49
37 10/11/01 $105.00 41% $151.00 59% $256.00 51
38 10/16/01 $101.00 34% $193.50 66% $294.50 45
39 10/18/01 $88.00 28% $230.00 72% $318.00 58
40 10/23/01 $120.00 38% $192.50 62% $312.50 37
41 10/25/01 $93.00 25% $280.00 75% $373.00 67
42 10/30/01 $33.00 5% $602.50 95% $635.50 127
TOTALS $7,510.03 48% $10,492.00 52% $18,002.03 3,711
Attachment 28 Lincoln Statistics
LINCOLN
Market
Number date
#'s sent to
Market #'s Sold # Donated
$'s sent to
Market $'s Sold $'s Donated
1 6/7/01 0 0.00 0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
2 6/12/01 0 0.00 0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
3 6/14/01 0 0.00 0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
4 6/19/01 0 0.00 0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
5 6/21/01 0 0.00 0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
6 6/26/01 66 46.77 19.23 $124.50 $86.43 $38.07
7 6/28/01 241 182.85 58.15 $377.50 $256.59 $120.91
8 7/3/01 119.5 80.22 39.28 $161.00 $103.26 $57.74
9 7/5/01 589 403.99 185.01 $360.00 $201.30 $158.70
10 7/10/01 217 158.48 58.52 $445.50 $362.05 $83.45
11 7/12/01 350 256.60 93.40 $539.50 $399.80 $139.70
12 7/17/01 371 254.36 116.64 $421.50 $299.17 $122.33
13 7/19/01 359 342.90 16.10 $439.50 $419.70 $19.80
14 7/24/01 482.5 334.27 148.23 $396.75 $279.71 $117.04
15 7/26/01 546 366.33 179.67 $661.00 $479.80 $181.20
16 7/31/01 666 487.37 178.63 $762.50 $575.81 $186.69
17 8/2/01 1328 1135.96 192.04 $1,102.50 $912.01 $190.49
18 8/7/01 821 585.84 235.16 $971.50 $706.33 $265.17
19 8/9/01 1218 1069.86 148.14 $1,329.50 $1,176.86 $152.64
20 8/14/01 1431.5 948.08 483.42 $1,317.50 $841.15 $476.35
21 8/16/01 2589 2065.08 523.92 $1,518.75 $1,018.38 $500.37
22 8/21/01 2400 1820.46 579.54 $1,807.00 $1,240.08 $566.92
23 8/23/01 3637 2601.40 1035.60 $2,226.50 $1,229.86 $996.64
24 8/28/01 1978 1564.25 413.75 $1,309.00 $931.91 $377.09
25 8/30/01 2097 1817.76 279.24 $1,277.50 $1,009.67 $267.83
26 9/4/01 1239.5 850.11 389.39 $1,293.50 $899.23 $394.27
27 9/6/01 1958 1766.96 191.04 $1,308.00 $1,123.30 $184.70
28 9/11/01 0 0.00 0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
29 9/13/01 1052 832.98 219.02 $856.00 $644.75 $211.25
30 9/18/01 2321 2009.53 311.47 $1,762.50 $1,460.63 $301.87
31 9/20/01 988 666.62 321.38 $835.50 $544.98 $290.52
32 9/25/01 655 484.98 170.02 $612.00 $458.29 $153.71
33 9/27/01 588 408.32 179.68 $617.50 $411.04 $206.46
34 10/2/01 673 491.29 181.71 $538.75 $374.20 $164.55
35 10/4/01 525 313.41 211.59 $485.00 $274.00 $211.00
36 10/9/01 486 355.67 130.33 $391.00 $269.69 $121.31
37 10/11/01 487 420.39 66.61 $427.00 $359.19 $67.81
38 10/16/01 336 219.48 116.52 $336.00 $216.73 $119.27
39 10/18/01 276 208.59 67.41 $253.00 $192.10 $60.90
40 10/23/01 533 318.96 214.04 $452.00 $220.28 $231.72
41 10/25/01 261 234.70 26.30 $211.00 $184.67 $26.33
42 10/30/01 1396 1096.00 300.00 $721.00 $662.65 $58.35
TOTALS 35281 27201 8080 $28,648.75 $20,825.61 $7,823.14
Boston Statistics Attachment 29
BOSTON
Market
Number date
#'s sent to
Market
#'s Used at
Market # Donated
$'s sent to
Market
$'s Used at
Market $'s Donated
1 6/7/01 136.5 68.50 68.00 $157.00 $80.75 $76.25
2 6/12/01 109 64.00 45.00 $150.75 $120.00 $30.75
3 6/14/01 139 77.00 62.00 $168.50 $109.75 $58.75
4 6/19/01 226 133.00 93.00 $308.50 $223.50 $85.00
5 6/21/01 193.25 117.25 76.00 $191.25 $140.25 $51.00
6 6/26/01 287.5 203.73 83.77 $241.75 $167.82 $73.93
7 6/28/01 246 186.65 59.35 $229.00 $155.66 $73.34
8 7/3/01 311 208.78 102.22 $263.50 $168.99 $94.51
9 7/5/01 321.5 220.51 100.99 $255.87 $143.07 $112.80
10 7/10/01 272.5 199.02 73.48 $272.50 $221.45 $51.05
11 7/12/01 343.25 251.65 91.60 $159.50 $118.20 $41.30
12 7/17/01 231.75 158.89 72.86 $218.50 $155.08 $63.42
13 7/19/01 154 147.10 6.90 $159.75 $152.55 $7.20
14 7/24/01 315 218.23 96.77 $457.50 $322.54 $134.96
15 7/26/01 157.5 105.67 51.83 $183.50 $133.20 $50.30
16 7/31/01 329.5 241.13 88.37 $340.25 $256.94 $83.31
17 8/2/01 304 260.04 43.96 $322.75 $266.99 $55.76
18 8/7/01 373 266.16 106.84 $376.75 $273.92 $102.83
19 8/9/01 319.5 280.64 38.86 $321.00 $284.14 $36.86
20 8/14/01 437 289.42 147.58 $427.75 $273.10 $154.65
21 8/16/01 247.5 197.42 50.08 $223.50 $149.87 $73.63
22 8/21/01 445 337.54 107.46 $382.75 $262.67 $120.08
23 8/23/01 317.5 227.10 90.40 $289.00 $159.64 $129.36
24 8/28/01 474.5 375.25 99.25 $478.75 $340.84 $137.91
25 8/30/01 261 226.24 34.76 $229.75 $181.58 $48.17
26 9/4/01 202.5 138.89 63.61 $199.25 $138.52 $60.73
27 9/6/01 138 124.54 13.46 $140.25 $120.45 $19.80
28 9/11/01 221 0.00 221.00 $230.75 $0.00 $230.75
29 9/13/01 180 142.52 37.48 $195.50 $147.25 $48.25
30 9/18/01 261 225.97 35.03 $263.50 $218.37 $45.13
31 9/20/01 171 115.38 55.62 $189.75 $123.77 $65.98
32 9/25/01 389 288.02 100.98 $409.25 $306.46 $102.79
33 9/27/01 230.1 159.78 70.32 $199.00 $132.46 $66.54
34 10/2/01 308.5 225.21 83.29 $288.75 $200.55 $88.20
35 10/4/01 234.25 139.84 94.41 $236.75 $133.75 $103.00
36 10/9/01 360.5 263.83 96.67 $374.50 $258.31 $116.19
37 10/11/01 209 180.41 28.59 $221.00 $185.91 $35.09
38 10/16/01 295.5 193.02 102.48 $309.13 $199.40 $109.73
39 10/18/01 244 184.41 59.59 $258.00 $195.90 $62.10
40 10/23/01 201 120.29 80.71 $199.50 $97.22 $102.28
41 10/25/01 185.5 166.80 18.70 $193.75 $169.58 $24.17
42 10/30/01 210.5 171.19 39.31 $205.75 $189.10 $16.65
TOTALS 10993.6 7901 3093 $10,924.00 $7,679.49 $3,244.51
Attachment 30 Market Donation Sheet
data entry data entry
Market
Number date
Total #'s
Received
Total #'s
Donated Total #'s Sold Donation %
by #
Total $'s
Received
Total $'s
Donated Total $'s Sold
1 6/7/01 136.5 68 68.5 49.82% $157.00 $76.25 $80.75
2 6/12/01 109 45 0 41.28% $150.75 $30.75 $120.00
3 6/14/01 139 62 77 44.60% $168.50 $58.75 $109.75
4 6/19/01 226 93 133 41.15% $308.50 $85.00 $223.50
5 6/21/01 193.25 76 117.25 39.33% $191.25 $51.00 $140.25
6 6/26/01 353.5 103 250.5 29.14% $366.25 $112.00 $254.25
7 6/28/01 487 117.5 369.5 24.13% $606.50 $194.25 $412.25
8 7/3/01 430.5 141.5 289 32.87% $424.50 $152.25 $272.25
9 7/5/01 910.5 286 624.5 31.41% $615.87 $271.50 $344.37
10 7/10/01 489.5 132 357.5 26.97% $718.00 $134.50 $583.50
11 7/12/01 693.25 185 508.25 26.69% $699.00 $181.00 $518.00
12 7/17/01 602.75 189.5 413.25 31.44% $640.00 $185.75 $454.25
13 7/19/01 513 23 490 4.48% $599.25 $27.00 $572.25
14 7/24/01 797.5 245 552.5 30.72% $854.25 $252.00 $602.25
15 7/26/01 703.5 231.5 472 32.91% $844.50 $231.50 $613.00
16 7/31/01 995.5 267 728.5 26.82% $1,102.75 $270.00 $832.75
17 8/2/01 1632 236 1396 14.46% $1,425.25 $246.25 $1,179.00
18 8/7/01 1194 342 852 28.64% $1,348.25 $368.00 $980.25
19 8/9/01 1537.5 187 1350.5 12.16% $1,650.50 $189.50 $1,461.00
20 8/14/01 1868.5 631 1237.5 33.77% $1,745.25 $631.00 $1,114.25
21 8/16/01 2836.5 574 2262.5 20.24% $1,742.25 $574.00 $1,168.25
22 8/21/01 2845 687 2158 24.15% $2,189.75 $687.00 $1,502.75
23 8/23/01 3954.5 1126 2828.5 28.47% $2,515.50 $1,126.00 $1,389.50
24 8/28/01 2452.5 513 1939.5 20.92% $1,787.75 $515.00 $1,272.75
25 8/30/01 2358 314 2044 13.32% $1,507.25 $316.00 $1,191.25
26 9/4/01 1442 453 989 31.41% $1,492.75 $455.00 $1,037.75
27 9/6/01 2096 204.5 1891.5 9.76% $1,448.25 $204.50 $1,243.75
28 9/11/01 221 221 0 100.00% $230.75 $230.75 $0.00
29 9/13/01 1232 256.5 975.5 20.82% $1,051.50 $259.50 $792.00
30 9/18/01 2582 346.5 2235.5 13.42% $2,026.00 $347.00 $1,679.00
31 9/20/01 1159 377 782 32.53% $1,025.25 $356.50 $668.75
32 9/25/01 1044 271 773 25.96% $1,021.25 $256.50 $764.75
33 9/27/01 818.1 250 568.1 30.56% $816.50 $273.00 $543.50
34 10/2/01 981.5 265 716.5 27.00% $827.50 $252.75 $574.75
35 10/4/01 759.25 306 453.25 40.30% $721.75 $314.00 $407.75
36 10/9/01 846.5 227 619.5 26.82% $765.50 $237.50 $528.00
37 10/11/01 696 95.2 600.8 13.68% $648.00 $102.90 $545.10
38 10/16/01 631.5 219 412.5 34.68% $645.13 $229.00 $416.13
39 10/18/01 520 127 393 24.42% $511.00 $123.00 $388.00
40 10/23/01 734 294.75 439.25 40.16% $651.50 $334.00 $317.50
41 10/25/01 446.5 45 401.5 10.08% $404.75 $50.50 $354.25
42 10/30/01 1606.5 300 1306.5 18.67% $926.75 $75.00 $851.75
TOTALS 46275 11133 35077 $39,572.75 $11,067.65 $28,505.10
Attachment 30 Market Donation Sheet
Donation %
by $
48.57%
20.40%
34.87%
27.55%
26.67%
30.58%
32.03%
35.87%
44.08%
18.73%
25.89%
29.02%
4.51%
29.50%
27.41%
24.48%
17.28%
27.29%
11.48%
36.16%
32.95%
31.37%
44.76%
28.81%
20.97%
30.48%
14.12%
100.00%
24.68%
17.13%
34.77%
25.12%
33.44%
30.54%
43.51%
31.03%
15.88%
35.50%
24.07%
51.27%
12.48%
8.09%
Farm % breakdown by $'s Attachment 31
data entry data entry
Market
Number date
Total $'s
Received $'s from Lincoln % from Lincoln $'s from Boston % from Boston
1 6/7/01 $157.00 $0.00 0.00% $157.00 100.00%
2 6/12/01 $150.75 $0.00 0.00% $150.75 100.00%
3 6/14/01 $168.50 $0.00 0.00% $168.50 100.00%
4 6/19/01 $308.50 $0.00 0.00% $308.50 100.00%
5 6/21/01 $191.25 $0.00 0.00% $191.25 100.00%
6 6/26/01 $366.25 $124.50 33.99% $241.75 66.01%
7 6/28/01 $606.50 $377.50 62.24% $229.00 37.76%
8 7/3/01 $424.50 $161.00 37.93% $263.50 62.07%
9 7/5/01 $615.87 $360.00 58.45% $255.87 41.55%
10 7/10/01 $718.00 $445.50 62.05% $272.50 37.95%
11 7/12/01 $699.00 $539.50 77.18% $159.50 22.82%
12 7/17/01 $640.00 $421.50 65.86% $218.50 34.14%
13 7/19/01 $599.25 $439.50 73.34% $159.75 26.66%
14 7/24/01 $854.25 $396.75 46.44% $457.50 53.56%
15 7/26/01 $844.50 $661.00 78.27% $183.50 21.73%
16 7/31/01 $1,102.75 $762.50 69.15% $340.25 30.85%
17 8/2/01 $1,425.25 $1,102.50 77.35% $322.75 22.65%
18 8/7/01 $1,348.25 $971.50 72.06% $376.75 27.94%
19 8/9/01 $1,650.50 $1,329.50 80.55% $321.00 19.45%
20 8/14/01 $1,745.25 $1,317.50 75.49% $427.75 24.51%
21 8/16/01 $1,742.25 $1,518.75 87.17% $223.50 12.83%
22 8/21/01 $2,189.75 $1,807.00 82.52% $382.75 17.48%
23 8/23/01 $2,515.50 $2,226.50 88.51% $289.00 11.49%
24 8/28/01 $1,787.75 $1,309.00 73.22% $478.75 26.78%
25 8/30/01 $1,507.25 $1,277.50 84.76% $229.75 15.24%
26 9/4/01 $1,492.75 $1,293.50 86.65% $199.25 13.35%
27 9/6/01 $1,448.25 $1,308.00 90.32% $140.25 9.68%
28 9/11/01 $230.75 $0.00 0.00% $230.75 100.00%
29 9/13/01 $1,051.50 $856.00 81.41% $195.50 18.59%
30 9/18/01 $2,026.00 $1,762.50 86.99% $263.50 13.01%
31 9/20/01 $1,025.25 $835.50 81.49% $189.75 18.51%
32 9/25/01 $1,021.25 $612.00 59.93% $409.25 40.07%
33 9/27/01 $816.50 $617.50 75.63% $199.00 24.37%
34 10/2/01 $827.50 $538.75 65.11% $288.75 34.89%
35 10/4/01 $721.75 $485.00 67.20% $236.75 32.80%
36 10/9/01 $765.50 $391.00 51.08% $374.50 48.92%
37 10/11/01 $648.00 $427.00 65.90% $221.00 34.10%
38 10/16/01 $645.13 $336.00 52.08% $309.13 47.92%
39 10/18/01 $511.00 $253.00 49.51% $258.00 50.49%
40 10/23/01 $651.50 $452.00 69.38% $199.50 30.62%
41 10/25/01 $404.75 $211.00 52.13% $193.75 47.87%
42 10/30/01 $926.75 $721.00 77.80% $205.75 22.20%
TOTALS $39,572.75 $28,648.75 60% $10,924.00 40%
Attachment 32 Farm % breakdown by #'s
data entry data entry data entry
Market
Number date
Total lbs
Received lbs from Lincoln % from Lincoln lbs from Boston % from Boston
1 6/7/01 136.5 0 0% 136.5 100%
2 6/12/01 109 0 0% 109 100%
3 6/14/01 139 0 0% 139 100%
4 6/19/01 226 0 0% 226 100%
5 6/21/01 193.25 0 0% 193.25 100%
6 6/26/01 353.5 66 19% 287.5 81%
7 6/28/01 487 241 49% 246 51%
8 7/3/01 430.5 119.5 28% 311 72%
9 7/5/01 910.5 589 65% 321.5 35%
10 7/10/01 489.5 # 217 44% 272.5 56%
11 7/12/01 693.25 350 50% 343.25 50%
12 7/17/01 602.75 371 62% 231.75 38%
13 7/19/01 513 359 70% 154 30%
14 7/24/01 797.5 482.5 61% 315 39%
15 7/26/01 703.5 546 78% 157.5 22%
16 7/31/01 995.5 666 67% 329.5 33%
17 8/2/01 1632 1328 81% 304 19%
18 8/7/01 1194 821 69% 373 31%
19 8/9/01 1537.5 1218 79% 319.5 21%
20 8/14/01 1868.5 1431.5 77% 437 23%
21 8/16/01 2836.5 2589 91% 247.5 9%
22 8/21/01 2845 2400 84% 445 16%
23 8/23/01 3954.5 3637 92% 317.5 8%
24 8/28/01 2452.5 1978 81% 474.5 19%
25 8/30/01 2358 2097 89% 261 11%
26 9/4/01 1442 1239.5 86% 202.5 14%
27 9/6/01 2096 1958 93% 138 7%
28 9/11/01 221 0 0% 221 100%
29 9/13/01 1232 1052 85% 180 15%
30 9/18/01 2582 2321 90% 261 10%
31 9/20/01 1159 988 85% 171 15%
32 9/25/01 1044 655 63% 389 37%
33 9/27/01 818.1 588 72% 230.1 28%
34 10/2/01 981.5 673 69% 308.5 31%
35 10/4/01 759.25 525 69% 234.25 31%
36 10/9/01 846.5 486 57% 360.5 43%
37 10/11/01 696 487 70% 209 30%
38 10/16/01 631.5 336 53% 295.5 47%
39 10/18/01 520 276 53% 244 47%
40 10/23/01 734 533 73% 201 27%
41 10/25/01 446.5 261 58% 185.5 42%
42 10/30/01 1606.5 1396 87% 210.5 13%
TOTALS 46274.6 35281 59% 10993.6 41%
 
Attachment 33
Market Analysis Workshop
I. Analysis
A. Qualitative vs. Quantitative
B. Other Vocabulary to Explore: Revenue, Gross, Net, Profit, Income,
Expenses, Overhead, Profit Margin, Margin of Error
II. Qualitative Analysis
1. Personal Feedback about Market
2. Suggestions
3. Specific Experiences
III. Quantitative Analysis
A. Inventory of Vegetables In and Out of the Market
B. Market 1 and 2 of the week
1. Count cash
2. Count Coupons
3. Count # of customers
4. Figure in costs of market (baked goods, fruit, other items)
5. Compare receipt amount to net amount
C. WIC Coupon – Stamping and Counting; Place coupons in groups of 100
to be reimbursed
D. Inventory of Materials: Pens, Tape, Chalk, Receipt Pads, Rubber Bands
(any materials you deem essential to the market)
IV. Regroup:
A. Have each group of youth describe what they did.
B. What were the results? How many pounds of vegetables came into the
market? How many pounds were sold? How much money was made?
In coupons? In cash? How many customers were there?
C. What did each activity teach you? How did the two markets that the
groups ran compare?