OMB No. 0581-0229
USDA Farmers Market  Agricultural Marketing Service  Transportation & Marketing Division
1400 Independence Ave SW Room 4543  Washington, D.C. 20250-0264
(202) 690-1300
USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and
Operating Guidelines
United States Department of Agriculture
Washington, D.C.
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PURPOSE
OUR MISSION 3
THE SPONSORING AGENCY: AGRICULTURAL MARKETING SERVICE 3
ELIGIBILITY: FOR FARMERS, GROWERS & PRODUCERS
PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY 4-5
VISITS AND INSPECTIONS 6
PERMITS AND LICENSES 6
APPLICATION PROCESS AND FEES
APPLICATION PROCESS 7-8
APPLICATION FEE 8
RULES & PROCEDURES
RESELLING 8
SALES DATA 8
FOOD SAFETY 9-10
MARKET COMMITMENT 10
CONDUCT ON FEDERAL PROPERTY 10-11
ATTIRE 11
DISPUTES 11
MEDIA POLICY 11
NON-COMPLIANCE 12
REASONS TO DISALLOW PARTICIPATION 12
SCALES 12
OPERATIONS
HOURS OF OPERATION 13
SAFETY 13
BUILDING ACCESS 13
CLEAN-UP 14
ELECTRICAL OUTLETS 14
INCLEMENT WEATHER 14
MARKET EQUIPMENT/SUPPLIES 15
SIGNAGE 15
STALLS AND PARKING 15
SECURITY 16
BUSKING 16
PARTICIPANT AGREEMENT
AGREEMENT FOR SIGNATURE 17
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
3
PURPOSE
OUR MISSION
The USDA Farmers Market located outside the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)
Headquarters in Washington, DC is the Department’s own “living laboratory” for farmers market
operations across the country. The mission of the market is to promote local food and build a community
where we work and live. The USDA Farmers Market supports the local economy, increases marketing
opportunities for farmers and small businesses, provides access to an assortment of local and regional
sourced products, and increases access to healthy, affordable fresh food in Ward 2.
The market is held May through October just off the National Mall on the corner of Independence
Avenue and 12th Street SW, and is well attended by USDA employees, other federal workers, tourists, and
local residents. Adjacent to the USDA Farmers Market is an area with seating and for picnicking. The
USDA Farmers Market offers free programs to educate eaters of all ages about their food, where it comes
from, and how to grow, select, and prepare it for everyday meals. The market serves as a place for
community members to gather, share a meal, and learn something new from a farmer, grower, producer,
and/or exhibitor.
THE SPONSORING AGENCY: AGRICULTURAL MARKETING SERVICE
USDA’s Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS) has operated this outdoor market for 24 years. AMS
works to improve marketing opportunities for producers across the country through the combination of
research, technical assistance, and grants. Each year, AMS helps hundreds of agricultural food businesses,
including farmers markets, food hubs, wholesale markets, retailers, State agencies, community planning
organizations, and other agri-food focused groups, enhance their local food marketing efforts. AMS
connects consumers to producers at over 8,700 farmers markets across the United States through the
National Farmers Market Directory available online at www.usdalocalfooddirectories.com. 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
4
ELIGIBILITY: FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS, GROWERS, & PRODUCERS
PARTICIPANT ELIGIBILITY
Participation in the market is for farmers, ranchers and growers who sell what they grow, raise or produce
on their farm, and for local producers who make products featuring agricultural foods from the
Chesapeake Bay region (including the states of Delaware, Maryland, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia
and West Virginia), and preferably within a 200-mile radius of Washington, D.C.
A farmer, rancher and grower must own or lease the land the product is produced on; and must participate
in the production, sales and marketing of the farm products. The re-sale of agricultural products by
farmers, ranchers and growers is not permitted. Agricultural products such as flowers, plants, bedding
plants, trees, fruits and vegetables, grain products, honey, eggs, and milk must be from a farmer’s or
grower’s own fields, greenhouses, hives, fowl, and/or herd. Selling goods from a neighboring farm is only
allowed if the market participant and the neighboring farm are both members of the same farmer, rancher,
or fishery cooperative.
If you are not a farmer, rancher or grower, you may sell at the USDA Farmers Market as a Producer as
long as a minimum of 75 percent of the ingredients (by item, not by weight) in every product sold are
sourced directly from a farmer, rancher or grower in the Chesapeake Bay region. Water, salt, pepper, oil,
and sugar are excluded from the 75 percent requirement. Producers must provide to USDA Farmers
Market personnel (hereafter “Market Management”) a list of all menu items and products to be sold
including ingredients for each product along with the name(s) of the farm(s) ingredients are sourced from
to meet the Producer requirement. Priority will be given to those vendors who grow, raise or harvest the
products that are featured in the items they sell.
Producers can only fall under one of the following categories to sell at the USDA Farmers Market:
 Baker: makes freshly baked goods from scratch, using ingredients from the Chesapeake Bay
region as much as possible. Baked goods must be handled in accordance with the rules and
regulations described by the state and local health department in which your farm or production
facility is located. Bakers will be required to submit current kitchen inspection reports, licenses
and permits.
 Dairy Product Maker: makes cheese and other value-added products from milk that is
purchased from dairy farms in the Chesapeake Bay region. Flavoring agents must be sourced
locally. Exotic, out-of-region flavorings may be used minimally.
 Beverage Maker: drinks made from scratch using locally sourced ingredients from the
Chesapeake Bay region. Exotic, out-of-region agricultural ingredients used to make a beverage
like coffee or tea should be submitted under the Specialty category. The sale of water is
prohibited.
 Fisherman/Waterman: raises or catches fresh fish and shellfish and uses local processing
facilities for seafood products to be sold at market. 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
5
 Food Concessions: ready-to-eat food prepared partially or entirely at the market. Such foods
must be made from locally sourced ingredients. Exotic, out of region ingredients will be admitted
on a case-by-case basis. Heat and serve products prepared off-site are not allowed under this
category.
 Meat Processor: primarily operates a food processing facility that processes meat raised by
regional farmers or ranchers. Sales of fresh meat or poultry products are prohibited. Only frozen
meat and frozen poultry products that have been processed in a USDA Food Safety Inspection
Service (FSIS) licensed and inspected facility and bear the USDA seal of inspection are
permitted.
 Pasta Maker: makes pasta and sauces from scratch, using ingredients from the Chesapeake Bay
region.
 Soap Maker: handcrafts soaps and/or other health-care products from scratch using ingredients
from the Chesapeake Bay region.
 Specialty: other agricultural product(s), which are not currently available at the market and/or in
the Chesapeake Bay region but are important to the agricultural economy in the United States will
be considered on a case-by-case basis. Exotic, out-of-region products such as coffee, tea,
chocolate, and olive oil fall under this category.
 Value Added Food Producer: makes jellies and jams, preserves, syrups, salsas, flavored oils,
vinegars, pickles, fermented products, and dried products using produce grown by a farmer,
rancher or grower in the Chesapeake Bay region.
Below is a sample of what Producers must provide to Market Management to be considered. This
example falls under the Food Concessions category. The seasonal menu item meets the ingredientsourcing requirement because 87.5 percent of ingredients (seven out of eight) are directly sourced
from four farms in the Chesapeake Bay region. Salt is excluded from the requirement.
Summer Menu Item: Ham and Corn Salad
Ingredients: heavy cream, vinegar, salt, arugula, spinach, lettuce, tomato, corn,
ham
Ingredient Sources:
 Heavy cream – Trickling Spring, Chambersburg, Pennsylvania
 Arugula, spinach, lettuce – Little Wild Things City Farm, Washington, DC
 Tomato, corn – One Straw Farm, White Hall, Maryland
 Ham – Ayrshire Farm, Upperville, Virginia
 Vinegar – Restaurant Depot, Alexandria, Virginia
 Salt – excluded
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
6
VISITS AND INSPECTIONS
All potential and participating farms and business are subject to visits and inspections. Market
Management reserve the right to inspect the farm or establishment to confirm crops and products being
sold at the USDA Farmers Market are in compliance with market guidelines. Market participants must
submit a map and directions to their farm or production location along with the application. Any farmer or
producer who is found to have violated the market guidelines will receive a warning, temporary
suspension, or be permanently removed from the USDA Farmers Market. (See “Non-compliance” section
for more details)
PERMITS AND LICENSES
All farmers, ranchers, growers and producers selling at the USDA farmers market must abide by all
applicable federal, state, and local health regulations. Market participants will be responsible for obtaining
and paying for any permits and licenses required by the District of Columbia. Market participants must
comply with the regulations within their respective state including regulations pertaining to the
harvesting, food preparation and safety, and labeling of products within their respective states for
products that are brought to and sold at the USDA Farmers Market. When submitting the application all
farmers and businesses must include a copy of all applicable reports, permits and licenses required by the
health department of the state or county from which the products originated. All permits and licenses
must be kept current for the entire market season.
Contact Information:
The District of Columbia Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs
(202) 442- 4400
Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene Rules and Licenses
(410) 767- 8400
New York State Department of Agriculture & Markets
(800) 554-4501
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture
(717) 787- 4315
Virginia Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
(804) 786-3520
West Virginia Department of Health & Human Resources
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
7
(304) 558-2981
APPLICATION PROCESS AND FEES
APPLICATION PROCESS
All farmers, growers and producers – new and returning – must complete the application. If accepted into
the market, all participants must sign and submit Page 17 of this document entitled “Participant
Agreement” to indicate that you have read the terms and conditions set forth in this document – the
USDA Farmers Market 2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guideline – and agree to abide by
them.
Farmers, ranchers, growers and producers that participated in the previous market season will have the
opportunity to retain their space provided prior year performance is satisfactory, market guidelines are
met, and the required information is submitted on time. To be considered for the 2019 market season
all new and returning market participants must submit a completed application and the required
documentation by Thursday, March 7, 2019. In the event that space becomes available during the
market season, those on the waitlist who are the best fit, and meet all market criteria, will be contacted.
Prospective vendors can apply to the USDA Farmers Market online at ManageMyMarket.com. If you
have questions about the online application process, please call (202) 690-1300 for assistance.
Applications will NOT be reviewed unless complete. An application is not considered complete without
the inclusion of all applicable permits for all products and documentation that supports 75 percent of
ingredients in your product(s) come directly from farmers, ranchers and growers in the Chesapeake Bay
region.
A fully complete application includes the following:
 Completed application signed and dated;
 Complete list of products or menu items along with a list of ingredients for each item and sources
for ingredients. Name of farm, ranch or grower, address and contact information is required for
all ingredients. All products must have prior written approval from Market Management before
bringing/selling the product(s) at the farmers market;
 Proof of ownership or copy of signed lease agreement(s) for farmer/rancher/grower;
 Map and/or directions to farm, grow site or production facility;
 Liability Insurance information;
 Copies of organic certification documents (if applicable);
 Proof of membership in a farmer, rancher, or fishery cooperative (if applicable);
 Copies of all food safety forms, inspection reports and licenses/permits applicable to the sale of
your product(s). Participants are responsible for knowing which requirements apply to their
product(s); and
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
8
 Copy of signed Participant Agreement (Page 17 of this document) form, if accepted into the
USDA Farmers Market. The Participant Agreement will be collected at the mandatory vendor
orientation. The signed form is used to certify that the farmer, grower or producer has read,
understands and will abide by the USDA Farmers Market 2019 Rules and Procedures and
Operating Guidelines.
APPLICATION FEE

USDA does not charge a fee to farmers, ranchers, growers and producers who participate in the USDA
Farmers Market. Participants are required to commit to supporting the USDA gleaning/food recovery
initiative in lieu of paying market fees. This commitment requires market participants to donate fresh
useable produce and other food products at the end of each market to DC Central Kitchen. For
participants unable to donate their own product, we request that you purchase food items from other
market participants to donate or give a monetary donation (minimum of 5 dollars) to DC Central Kitchen.
100% participation from USDA Farmers Market farmers, growers and producers is expected.
Failure to participant will result in termination from the market.
RULES AND PROCEDURES
RESELLING
Agricultural products sold such as flowers, plants, bedding plants, trees, fruits and vegetables, grain
products, honey, eggs, and milk must come from a farmer’s or grower’s OWN fields, greenhouses, hives,
fowl, and/or herd. Re-sale of another farmer’s flowers, plants, bedding plants, trees, fruits and vegetables,
grain products, honey, eggs, and milk is PROHIBITED. Selling goods from a neighboring farm is only
allowed if the market participant and the neighboring farm are both members of the same farmer, rancher,
or fishery cooperative.
Producers participating in the USDA Farmers Market under one of the categories listed on Page 4 and 5
are required to purchase a minimum of 75 percent of their ingredients from a farmer, rancher and/or
grower in the Chesapeake Bay region. Priority will be given to those vendors who grow, raise or harvest
the products that are featured in the items they sell. Market Management will approve products to be sold
on a case-by-case basis.
SALES DATA
Market participants will be required to submit weekly sales data for USDA internal use only. Individual
sales data will be kept confidential. Market participants are required to provide a total sales figure from 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
9
the previous market to Market Management on Fridays before 11 a.m. Failure to comply may result in
suspension or termination from the market.
FOOD SAFETY
Proper handling of food at the USDA Farmers Market is a critical part of ensuring the safety of
consumers. Consuming contaminated foods or beverages causes foodborne illness. All food items must
always be properly protected against contamination. Therefore:
 Eggs: Shell eggs packed for the consumers are to be stored under refrigeration at a temperature of
45 degrees F° or below at all times while selling at the market. Shell eggs must be intact and free
of cracks. Eggs must be from the farmer’s own fowl. Egg cartons must be properly labeled in
accordance with the state regulations where the eggs are produced. No resale of another farmer’s
eggs is allowed.
 Meat and Poultry Products: Meat and poultry products sold at the market must be kept frozen
at a temperature of 0 degrees F° or below. Calibrated thermometers are to be kept in
freezers/storage containers for meat and poultry products at all times when selling and will be
checked for appropriate temperature by Market Management.
 Participants may not display prepared/ready-to-eat-foods for sale without being properly
wrapped, covered or protected by an appropriately designed sneeze guard. All food items must be
kept covered and kept at a proper temperature prior to selling.
 Participants must store all food items at least 6 inches off the floor/ground.
 Participants cannot handle exposed, ready-to-eat foods directly with their bare hands. Utensils
such as deli paper, tongs, or disposable gloves may be used to prevent bare hand contact with
exposed, ready-to-eat foods. Disposable gloves that handle money should not come in direct
contact with ready-to eat-foods. Gloves must be discarded when they become damaged or soiled
or when employees are switching tasks.
 Food samples must be presented in a safe and sanitary manner and in accordance with the local
health department of the state or county in which the products originated. Participants must
provide cups, utensils or toothpicks for customers to use if providing samples of their products.
Participants also must provide trash receptacles for the disposal of any sampling materials.

 Ice used for consumption must be kept in clean containers and dispensed with appropriate
scoops/utensils.
 Adequate equipment must be used to maintain foods that require time and temperature control for
safety (potentially hazardous foods) at the appropriate temperature to prevent risk of illness. 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
10
 Foods that require cold holding refrigeration must be kept at 41 degrees F° or below. Foods that
require hot holding heat must be kept at 135 degrees F° or above.
 Market participants will have access to on-site hand washing stations and restrooms.
 All vehicles and other equipment used for transporting and displaying products must be kept
clean at all times.
MARKET COMMITMENT
Market participants commit to the entire market season unless other scheduling is noted in the application
and discussed with Market Management. A minimum attendance of 80 percent of market days noted in
the application is required. Product availability and seasonality may limit participants beginning and
ending dates; therefore, a schedule will be developed prior to the start of the market season documenting
the farmer, grower or producers commitment to the market. Participants that repeatedly arrive late or miss
market days will be permanently removed at the discretion of Market Management.
Farmer, growers and producers not able to attend a market day should telephone or email the following
staff at least 48 hours in advance so your space can be filled temporarily:
 Kayla Johnson (202) 740-0702 (cell) kayla.johnson@ams.usda.gov
 Lee Cliburn (202) 281-6349 (cell) lee.cliburn@ams.usda.gov
If unavailable to reach Ms. Johnson or Ms. Cliburn, please call the Transportation & Marketing Service
Division at (202) 690-1300. Not fulfilling your market commitment may result in suspension or
termination. (See “Non-compliance” section for more details)
CONDUCT ON FEDERAL PROPERTY
While on USDA property, farmers, growers, producers and their staff(s) shall comply with the General
Services Administration Federal Property Management Regulations at 41 CFR 102-74, Conduct on
Federal Property, as supplemented by Agriculture Property Management Regulations Part 102-74. In
addition, a farmer, grower, producer or their staff members must—
a. Display identification badges while on Federal property if engaging in the solicitation of funds as
authorized by 102-74.475. Each badge must indicate the permittee’s name, address, telephone
number, and organization;
b. Not misrepresent his or her identity to the public;
c. Not conduct any activities in a misleading or fraudulent manner; 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
11
d. Not discriminate on the basis of race, creed, religion, age, color, disability, sex, or national origin
in conducting activities;
e. Not use obscene or profane language;
f. Not distribute any item, nor post or otherwise affix any item, for which prior written
approval under 102-74.415 has not been obtained;
g. Not leave leaflets or other materials unattended on the property;
h. Not engage in activities that would interfere with the preferences afforded blind licensees
under the Randolph-Sheppard Act (20 U.S.C. 107); and
i. Not smoke tobacco products on the property.
Market participants are required to conduct themselves in a manner that contributes to a positive shopping
experience for market customers and should avoid unsuitable language, such as crude jokes, and engaging
in inappropriate behavior. Market participants should not leave their booths unattended during market
hours. Market Management expects market participants to be honest and to conduct themselves in a
courteous and friendly manner with other market participants, USDA staff and market customers. (See
“Non-compliance” section for more details)
WARNING—WEAPONS PROHIBITED
Federal law prohibits the possession of firearms or other dangerous weapons in Federal facilities and
Federal court facilities by all persons not specifically authorized by Title 18, United States Code, Section
930. Violators will be subject to fine and/or imprisonment for periods up to five (5) years.
ATTIRE
Vendors must wear appropriate attire and shoes at all times. Inappropriate attire includes crop tops and
clothing with overt commercial, religious or political messages on them. Market Management may send
inappropriately dressed market participants home to change their clothes. Vendors are encouraged to ask
Market Management in advance if they have any questions regarding the propriety of their dress so as to
avoid being sent home to change their clothes.
DISPUTES
It is the intent of the USDA Farmers Market to offer customers fresh, quality farm products. All
complaints and/or concerns, whether from participants or customers, should be reported to Market
Management and submitted in writing. Market Management will address all issues appropriately.
MEDIA POLICY
The market is public property and is often visited by tourists taking pictures, media personnel and 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
12
reporters. Farmers, ranchers, growers and producers can decline being photographed and, it is at their
discretion to answer questions or participate in interviews. If a market participant communicates with the
public/media, he or she is required to inform Market Management immediately so that appropriate
personnel can be informed and prepared to take any necessary follow-up action.
NON-COMPLIANCE
Market Management reserves the right to dismiss any Farmer, Rancher, Grower or Producer
and/or remove any product being sold that does not adhere to the rules and procedures as outlined
in this document. Consequences for violating the USDA Farmers Market Rules and Procedures and
Operating Guidelines will result in the following:
First offense: Verbal warning Second offense: Written warning
Third offense: Suspension from market Fourth offense: Termination from market
REASONS TO DISALLOW PARTICIPATION
Efforts will be made to accommodate those who apply: however, a farmer, rancher, grower or producer
may not be allowed to participate in the market due to prior performance, insufficient space; business
location; product mix; duplication of product(s); relationship with farmers; sourcing impact; unfulfilled
ingredient sourcing requirement; not submitting the required licenses/permits on time; late arrival and/or
absence without proper notice; and refusal to adhere to the USDA Farmers Market guidelines.
SCALES
The Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs (DCRA) is responsible for inspecting scales at the
USDA Farmers Market. DCRA’s Office of Weights & Measures inspects these devices twice a year to
make sure they are properly calibrated and accurate. USDA Farmers Market participants must register
their device(s) every year with DCRA. Scales must be clearly visible and readable to customers at all
times. Any problems identified by DCRA must be corrected within the timeframe provided by the
District of Columbia or result in a fine. If you have any questions regarding your scales, please contact
the Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs Weights and Measures at 1110 U Street, SE
Washington, D.C. 20020 or call (202) 698-2130.
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
13
OPERATIONS
HOURS OF OPERATION
The USDA Farmers Market is held every Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. from May to October. The
market is located at the USDA Headquarters Building in the parking lot, located on the corner of 12th
Street and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250.
For the safety of our customers, market participants must arrive at the market no later than 8:30 a.m.
and may not drive their vehicle in or out of the market parking lot after 8:45 a.m. or before 2:15 p.m. All
market participants must be ready to start selling when the market opens at 9:00 a.m. The market will
open at 9:00 a.m. and close at 2:00 p.m. each market. Due to space limitations, latecomers may be
relocated or denied admission at the sole discretion of Market Management. Market participants will
be allowed 15 minutes after the market closes to complete sales transactions initiated before the
2:00 p.m. closing. All vehicles must vacate the market site no later than 3:30 p.m.
SAFETY
Participants must perform safety and serviceability checks of all equipment and appliances prior to use.
All participants are subject to random safety spot inspections by the Office of Operations Safety Staff.
Areas that are subject to inspection include the following:
• Propane tanks must be pre-checked for damage and leaks to hoses and tanks;
• A-B-C fire extinguishers must be provided by the vendor and readily available;
• Electrical extension cords must be rated for outdoor usage and UL (Underwriters Laboratory)
certified;
• Cords must be three-prong and securely installed so that no looseness exists between the prongs
and the connection point at all times;
• Cords must be out of foot traffic areas to prevent trips and falls;
• All cords must be checked for damage and will be removed from use if found;
• In the event of high winds, securely fasten tents to prevent from flying away; and
• Maintain records of initial safety checks. Follow all manufactures requirements for equipment
and appliances.
BUILDING ACCESS
Farmers, ranchers, growers, producers and their staff(s) will have limited building access. A list of 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
14
participant names will be provided to USDA’s Protective Operations Division, which will allow access
only to the restrooms in the Jamie L. Whitten Building. Participants will be provided with USDA Farmers
Market badges to show security officers when entering and exiting the Whitten building. Anyone who
deviates from the designated locations may be escorted out of the building by security and will lose
future building access privileges.
CLEAN-UP
Market participants are responsible for maintaining their space in a clean and sanitary manner with
attention to public safety and respect for the use of this public space by others following the end of the
market day. Market participants are responsible for cleaning all trash and waste including sweeping up
any debris within and around their allotted space. On-site trash receptacles are provided for customer and
participant use.
ELECTRICAL OUTLETS
There is limited access to electricity at the USDA Farmers Market. All farmers, ranchers, growers and
producers must inform Market Management of their electrical needs and receive prior approval before
using any existing electrical outlets at the market. Generators are not permitted for use at the farmers
market without Market Management approval. If extension cords are used, they must be designed for
outdoor use, be three-prong, safely secured at all times, and out of the way of foot traffic. Outdoor
extension cords offer protection from moisture, direct sunlight and abrasion. Devices with two-prong
plugs (like appliances) can be used safely with a three-prong extension cord. Devices with three-prong
plugs should only be used with three-prong extension cords. The third prong in the extension cord
provides a path to the ground wire and greatly reduces the risk of electrical shocks and fires. Market
participants are responsible for supplying extension cords for their stall use that have been tested and
certified for safety and quality by UL (Underwriters Laboratory). Check with Market Management to
ensure that you are using an approved outdoor cord. If an inappropriate cord is being used, then it will be
removed from your stall and your market sales may be impacted. Market participants are not to ask
USDA on-site electricians to fix their own equipment if it is not working properly.
INCLEMENT WEATHER
The USDA Farmers Market is outdoors and open rain or shine. Participation on market days with severe
or inclement weather is at the discretion of farmers, ranchers, growers or producers. Be sure to notify
market personnel of your decision not to participate 48 hours ahead of time. In cases of weather reports
predicting inclement weather, such as high winds, severe thunderstorms, tornado warnings, etc., Market
Management reserves the right to cancel the market. If Market Management cancels the market,
participants will be notified of the closure in a timely manner by email or phone.
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
15
MARKET EQUIPMENT/SUPPLIES
Market Management will supply market participants with market canopies and will provide assistance
with the setup and breakdown of the canopies each market day. Those who arrive late will be responsible
for the setup of their canopy. Each farm/business will be responsible for bringing tables, tablecloths,
chairs, certified scales, signage, price lists, marketing materials, food sampling supplies, and change.
Vendors are required to comply with the District’s food packaging laws. The Food Service Packaging
Requirements effective January 1, 2017, mandates that District businesses and organizations that sell or
serve food or beverages in the District must use recyclable or compostable food service products. The law
applies to any food service products designed for single use. These include take-out containers, bowls,
plates, trays, cups, cutlery, and other items. The law does not apply to materials used to package raw,
uncooked, or butchered meat, fish, poultry, or seafood. Foodservice products made of expanded
polystyrene, commonly known as foam or StyrofoamTM, are strictly prohibited.
SIGNAGE
Market participants must clearly display signs that show the name of their farm/business and location,
product types, prices, and enrollment in any Federal nutrition assistance programs. Prices must always
be legible and visible for customers to see. Prices of items for sale must utilize one or more of the
following techniques:
 Individual price stickers on each item;
 Individual price signs for each type of item; or
 A list of prices on a large sign or board.
Producers must display a sign that lists the farms from which ingredients are sourced at all times.
STALLS AND PARKING
Every effort is made to minimize changes to the market layout, but space adjustments will be made at the
discretion of Market Management if deemed necessary. Assigned space sizes are either 10x10 or 10x20
feet. Parking will be provided for one vehicle outside of the market. Parking in the USDA Farmers
Market is limited to Farmers, Ranchers, Growers and/or Producers that REQUIRE their vehicle to
operate and will be determined in discussion with Market Management. Preference will be given to
Farmers, Ranchers and Growers. If a market participant receives an assigned parking space within the
USDA Farmers Market, the vehicle must fit within the assigned 16w x 17d foot parking space. All other 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
16
vehicles must be offloaded and removed no later than 8:45 a.m. from the market lot. Provided parking
passes must be clearly displayed each market day on the dashboard of the farmer or producer’s vehicle,
while parked in a USDA parking lot. Choosing to offload and/or park alongside the market on 12th Street,
SW is not recommended, at the vendor’s own risk, and is subject to ticketing and fees by the District of
Columbia.
SECURITY

Every effort will be made by USDA to make the market a safe environment for farmers, ranchers,
growers, producers, and customers. However, it will be the responsibility of the market participants to
take every precaution to safeguard all valuables and cash during market hours. Suspicious activity should
be reported immediately to Market Management and/or onsite Security officers. In cases of emergency at
the USDA Farmers Market call (202) 720-0000.
BUSKING
Live entertainment creates a pleasing atmosphere for customers and vendors at the market. Street
performers known as buskers – including musicians, actors, jugglers, mimes, acrobats, tumblers, human
statues, magicians, puppeteers, and others in the local performance art community – interested in
performing at the market should contact Lee Cliburn at lee.cliburn@ams.usda.gov or (202) 281-6349.
Those who apply will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Selections are made at the sole discretion of
Market Management based on availability, appropriateness and skill level. Buskers are not charged a fee
to perform and do not receive compensation from USDA. Tips may be accepted. Performers may sell
CDs, tapes or promotional t-shirts related to the performance as long as a copy of all licenses/permits
applicable to the sale of these product(s) is provided and approved in advance. Buskers must be a positive
addition to the market atmosphere and not adversely affect market operations. (See “Conduct on Federal
Property” and “Attire” sections for more details)
Buskers are generally scheduled to perform from 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. when the market is busiest.
Performance location is assigned and may be subject to change without notice. Market Management will
supply buskers with a market canopy (10x10 or 10x20 feet), tables or chairs if deemed necessary. Parking
will be provided for one vehicle outside of the market. There is limited access to electricity so electrical
needs must be discussed in advance. (See “Electrical Outlets” section for more details)
According to the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, an agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to a
collection of information unless it displays a valid OMB control number. The valid OMB control number for this information collection is 0581-
0229. The time required to complete this information collection is estimated to average .101 hours per response, including the time for
reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the
collection of information.
In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its
Agencies, offices, and employees, and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based
on race, color, national origin, religion, sex, gender identity (including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital status,
family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity,
in any program or activity conducted or funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary
by program or incident. Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large
print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the responsible Agency or USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice 
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
17
and TTY) or contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339. Additionally, program information may be made available in
languages other than English.
To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at How to
File a Program Discrimination Complaint and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the
information requested in the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to
USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW,
Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; (2) fax: (202) 690-7442; or (3) email: program.intake@usda.gov.
PARTICIPANT AGREEMENT
This page must be signed and returned only if you have been selected as a farmer, rancher, grower,
producer, or busker to participate in the 2019 USDA Farmers Market.
All participating farmers, ranchers, growers, producers and buskers must adhere to the Rule and
Procedures and Operating Guidelines as outlined in this document. The Rules and Procedures and
Operating Guidelines are used to ensure the integrity of all products sold at the USDA Farmers Market.
By signing below, I certify that I have read, understand and agree to adhere to all applicable rules and
guidelines as outlined and referenced in this document. I further understand that should I fail to comply
with these specified rules and guidelines, my participation in the USDA Farmers Market may be
terminated.
_____________________________________ ___________________
USDA Farmers Market Participant Date
Signature
Print full name:
Business name:
Business address:
Business address continued:
Cell phone number:
E-mail address:
OMB No. 0581-0229
THE USDA FARMERS MARKET
2019 Rules and Procedures and Operating Guidelines
USDA is an equal opportunity provider, lender and employer.
January 2019
18