190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
National Organic Farming Handbook
November 2015
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
November 2015
Cover photos: Top photo: organic cow-calf operation in Iowa; bottom left: NRCS planner and
producer walking by organic soybeans; bottom right: organic tomatoes. Photos by Ron Nichols,
USDA NRCS.
The USDA prohibits discrimination against its customers, employees, and applicants for
employment on the bases of race, color, national origin, age, disability, sex, gender identity,
religion, reprisal, and where applicable, political beliefs, marital status, familial or parental
status, sexual orientation, or all or part of an individual's income is derived from any public
assistance program, or protected genetic information in employment or in any program or
activity conducted or funded by the Department. (Not all prohibited bases will apply to all
programs and/or employment activities.)
If you wish to file a Civil Rights Program complaint of discrimination, complete the USDA
Program Discrimination Complaint Form (PDF), found online at http://www.ocio.usda.gov/sites/
default/files/docs/2012/Complain_combined_6_8_12.pdf, or at any USDA office, or call (866) 632-
9992 to request the form. You may also write a letter containing all of the information requested
in the form. Send your completed complaint form or letter to us by mail at U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Director, Office of Adjudication, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC
20250-9410, by fax (202) 690-7442 or email at program.intake@usda.gov.
Individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or have speech disabilities and you wish to file either
an EEO or program complaint please contact USDA through the Federal Relay Service at (800)
877-8339 or (800) 845-6136 (in Spanish).
Persons with disabilities who wish to file a program complaint, please see information
above on how to contact us by mail directly or by email. If you require alternative means of
communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) please contact
USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). 
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Acknowledgments
NRCS Team Members
Glen Abney, Area Resource Conservationist, Kentucky
Thomas Akin, Conservation Agronomist, Massachusetts
Alice Begin, Resource Conservationist, Maine
Lindsay Haines, Conservation Program Specialist, National Headquarters
James Howard, District Conservationist, California
David Lamm, National Soil Health Team Leader, East National Technology Support Center
Pat Murphy, State Resource Conservationist, Wisconsin
Todd Peplin, Farm Bill Specialist, Oregon
Susan Samson-Liebig, Soil Quality Specialist, North Dakota
Ruth Shaffer, Water Quality Specialist, Michigan
Cheryl Simmons, Natural Resources Specialist, Central National Technology Support Center
Ben Smallwood, Conservation Specialist, National Headquarters
Sudie Thomas, Wildlife Biologist, South Carolina
Pedro Torres, Tribal Liaison, California
Kalven Trice, Senior Economist, National Headquarters
Rafael Vega, District Conservationist, Indiana
Partner Team Members
Lillian “Ebonie” Alexander, Executive Director, Black Family Land Trust, North Carolina
Keith Baldwin, Farm Services Coordinator, Carolina Farm Stewardship Association, North Carolina
Jo Ann Baumgartner, Director, Wild Farm Alliance, California
Harriet Behar, Organic Specialist, Midwest Organic & Sustainable Education Service, Wisconsin
Ben Bowell, Organic Education Specialist, Oregon Tilth, Oregon
Sarah Brown, Education Director, Oregon Tilth, Oregon
Traci Bruckner, Senior Associate for Agriculture and Conservation Policy, Center for Rural Affairs,
Nebraska
Rex Dufour, Manager, California Office, National Center for Appropriate Technology, California
Greg Fogel, Senior Policy Specialist, National Sustainable Agriculture Coalition, District of Columbia
Jennifer Miller, Director, Healthy Food and Farms Program, Northwest Center for Alternative to
Pesticides, Idaho
Jose Perez, Florida Organic Growers, Florida
Jeff Schahczenski, Program Specialist, National Center for Appropriate Technology, Montana
Mark Schonbeck, Newsletter Editor and Policy Liaison, Virginia Biological Farming Association, Virginia
The NRCS Organic Farming Handbook was developed to support NRCS conservation planners and
other agricultural professionals as they work with organic producers. The handbook describes organic
systems and identifies key resources to guide conservation planning and implementation on organic farms.
Producers and other audiences may also find the handbook useful, particularly the resources listed in
various sections.
This handbook was developed by a team comprised of NRCS staff and partner organizations from across the
country and from a range of disciplines.
Coordinator for the handbook was Ben Bowell, Organic Education Specialist, Oregon Tilth, Oregon.
Contact Lindsay Haines (lindsay.haines@wdc.usda.gov) for comments or suggested revisions to this
handbook.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Table of Contents
A. Overview of Organic Agriculture ............................................................................A-1
1. Organic Farming System Principles............................................................................................ A-3
2. Resource Conservation Needs, Opportunities, and Challenges in Organic Agriculture .......... A-3
B. National Organic Program (NOP) ...........................................................................B-1
1. USDA Organic Regulations and Roles......................................................................................... B-1
2. Overview of Organic Certification Process Through NOP......................................................... B-4
C. Conservation Planning With Existing Organic/Transitional Producers .......C-1
1. Nine Steps of Conservation Planning in Organic Systems ........................................................ C-1
2. Technical Service Providers ......................................................................................................... C-3
3. CAP Supporting Organic Transition (CAP 138) ......................................................................... C-4
4. Conservation Compliance............................................................................................................. C-4
D. Integral Conservation Activities for Organic Production Systems ............... D-1
1. Nutrient Management..................................................................................................................D-3
2. Cover Crops ...................................................................................................................................D-4
3. Compost.........................................................................................................................................D-6
4. Crop rotations ...............................................................................................................................D-6
5. Tillage and Residue Management................................................................................................ D-7
6. Integrated Pest Management.......................................................................................................D-8
7. Buffers and Natural Areas .........................................................................................................D-10
8. Organic Grazing..........................................................................................................................D-12
9. Livestock Living Conditions, Facilities, and Structures........................................................... D-13
Appendix 1
USDA Organic Regulatory Production Requirements Related to Resource Conservation .....App1-1
Appendix 2
Additional Resources .................................................................................................................. App2-1
A-1
National Organic Farming Handbook
A. Overview of Organic Agriculture
1. Organic Farming System Principles
Organic farming systems reflect several fundamental principles that early innovators established through
careful observation of soils, crops, livestock, and life processes in natural and agricultural systems.
Practitioners have refined, updated, and expressed these principles in different ways over the past 75
years, yet the foundational principles of organic agriculture remain relatively constant.1 In addition to over
12,000 USDA-certified organic producers2, many other U.S. producers implement “sustainable,” “ecological,”
“biological,” or “natural” methods derived from these same principles. While many producers may follow
similar principals, all certified organic producers must comply with the USDA’s Agricultural Marketing
Service (AMS) National Organic Program (NOP) regulations – commonly known as the USDA organic
regulations. Only those producers following the USDA organic regulations may market their products as
organic.
Use Natural Materials
In general, the USDA organic regulations allow the use of natural fertilizers and materials, and exclude
synthetic substances. However, organic systems are more complex than this general standard and include
broader principles described below. In the words of author and sustainable farming advocate Wendell Berry,
“An organic farm, properly speaking, is not one that uses certain methods and substances and avoids
others; it is a farm whose structure is formed in imitation of the structure of a natural system that has the
integrity, the independence and the benign dependence of an organism.”3
Protect the Health of the Soil and Natural Resources
Organic practitioners and researchers emphasize healthy, living, nutritionally balanced soil as the
foundation of crop, livestock, and human health, and of sustainable and successful farming.4 To maintain
healthy soil, organic farmers control erosion, feed and protect the soil life, and replenish organic matter as
well as plant nutrients. They adopt diverse crop rotations to balance nutrient demands on the soil, protect
and enhance soil life, and control erosion by maintaining good tilth, planting cover crops, and adopting other
conservation practices. More recently, research findings on the benefits of an active and diverse soil food
web have refined this principle and established its importance throughout modern agriculture.
Early leaders of the organic farming movement emphasized that, over the long term, successful farming
depends on the health of all natural resources on the farm and in its surroundings. All farming inevitably
alters the natural condition of soil and other resources within production areas to some degree, often with
some decrease in biodiversity. To sustain biodiversity, organic farmers strive to protect water, wildlife,
native plant communities, and other resources from agricultural impacts. In organic crop and livestock
production pest, weed, and disease management emphasize cultural and preventative practices before the
use of approved organic crop protection products. Producers support biodiversity by providing habitat for
wildlife, pollinators and other organisms in cultivated and uncultivated areas of the farming system.
1 Schonbeck, Mark W. 2014. A Brief History and Philosophy of Organic Farming. Handout (2 pp) originally developed and used for SARE PDP
agricultural professional trainings offered by Southern Sustainable Agriculture Working Group, 2011 – 2013; revised June 2014.
2 USDA National Organic Program. This does not include all certified operations (i.e. handling operations). Does not include farms exempt from
certification. http://apps.ams.usda.gov/nop/.
3 Berry, Wendell. 1981. The Gift of Good Land: Further Essays Cultural and Agricultural. San Francisco: North Point, 1981.
4 Howard, Sir Albert. 1947. The Soil and Health: a Study of Organic Agriculture. Republished with a foreword by Wendell Berry in 2006,
University Press of Kentucky, 307 pp.
A-2
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Early leaders of the organic farming movement emphasized that, over the long term, successful farming
depends on the health of all natural resources on the farm and in its surroundings. All farming inevitably
alters the natural condition of soil and other resources within production areas to some degree, often with
some decrease in biodiversity. To sustain biodiversity, organic farmers strive to protect water, wildlife,
native plant communities, and other resources from agricultural impacts. In organic crop and livestock
production, pest, weed, and disease management emphasize cultural and preventative practices before the
use of approved organic crop protection products. Producers support biodiversity by providing habitat for
wildlife, pollinators, and other organisms in cultivated and uncultivated areas of the farming system.
Simulate Nature in Farming Practices
Organic producers strive to develop farming systems that mimic nature and utilize natural processes and
materials to provide for crop and livestock nutrition, manage pests and weeds, and attain production goals,
while conserving the biological diversity on which their farm depends.
Crop and nutrient management
Living plants in a natural ecosystem, such as a forest or prairie, derive essential nutrients from the
breakdown of plant and animal residues that fall on or are deposited into the soil. As soil organisms
decompose organic residues, they release plant-available nutrients to support the next season’s growth, and
form humus that sustains soil quality. Mimicking this natural cycle, producers replenish soil organic matter
and nutrients by returning animal and green manures, crop residues, and other organic sources to the soil,
thereby maintaining soil fertility and crop yields. These practices feed the soil, and the soil feeds the crop.
When crops need additional nutrients, organic producers choose plant, animal, and natural mineral-based
fertilizers, most of which release nutrients gradually through the action of soil organisms. Synthetic
fertilizers are prohibited in organic production systems.
Pest management
In natural ecosystems, insects, rodents, and
other herbivorous organisms feed on vegetation;
however, predators and parasites feed on the
herbivores, thus helping to limit damage to the
plant community. Native plants can fall prey to
pathogenic fungi and other microorganisms, but
most soil microorganisms play important roles in
plant vigor, including disease suppression. The
web of relationships among diverse organisms
in a healthy, mature forest or prairie creates
a balance that generally controls a particular
pest from destroying other species. Organic
farmers simulate and utilize these natural checks
and balances to limit crop damage from pests.
Producers establish beneficial habitat plantings
to harbor predators of crop pests, build soil health
to suppress soil-borne pathogens, diversify crop
rotations to disrupt pest cycles, and plant cover
crops to suppress weeds.
Resource cycling
Some organic proponents focus on cycling of
resources within the farm and minimizing
dependence on off-farm inputs. Crop rotations
that include cover crops and a mix of deep and
shallow-rooted crops may enhance nutrient and
water utilization and cycling within the soil
Figure 1 Examining organically managing soil under
alfalfa
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 A-3
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
profile. Practices that increase soil organic matter and structure, and hence water and nutrient retention,
further improve resource cycling and reduce dependence on off-farm inputs. Integration of crop and
livestock production can enhance nutrient cycling, as livestock consume on-farm forages and crop residues,
and provide nutrient-rich manure for subsequent crop production.
Biodiversity
Organic systems attempt to mirror nature by maintaining biodiversity on the farm. Producers diversify
and rotate crops, and plant field edges with flowering plants to support pollinators and other beneficial
organisms. Fields may include hedge and tree rows of varied species, providing wildlife habitat and
structural biodiversity above and below ground. Wildlife corridors and wildlife-friendly fences maintain
connectivity for wide-ranging wildlife such as deer and predators.
Tillage and weed management
Without access to many herbicides, organic producers often use tillage in annual crop production as a tool
to manage weeds and cover crops without herbicides. Recent advances in organic no-till and conservationtillage systems, such as the roller-crimper, and the use of flame weeders and mulches, have helped organic
producers reduce the intensity of soil disturbance in annual crop rotations. In addition, planting “subsoiling”
cover crops (deep-rooted plants that can break up a hard pan in the soil) such as tillage radish, sorghumsudangrass hybrids, and clovers allow producers to accomplish biologically what has traditionally been done
with mechanical subsoilers and other deep tillage implements. While it is recognized that tillage to control
weeds reduces soil organic carbon, the rotation, cover crop, and manure management practices employed
generally increase soil carbon levels in organic production systems.
Adapt to Local Conditions
Selection of crop varieties and crop seed for organic production reflects the organic principles of working with
nature (i.e., plant what will grow well locally in an organic system). Organic farmers seek out and plant
varieties that tolerate locally prevalent pests and diseases with minimum intervention, and that perform
well in the farm’s climate and soils. Many prefer locally or regionally produced seed, which may show
enhanced adaptation to local conditions.
2. Resource Conservation Needs, Opportunities, and Challenges in Organic Agriculture
As described below, the NOP’s definition of organic production codifies the organic movement’s historical
emphasis on ecologically sound practices and resource conservation: organic production is a system managed
to “foster cycling of resources, promote ecological balance, and conserve biodiversity.” To achieve these
objectives, organic producers commonly implement a number of conservation practices that align well
with NRCS conservation activities. For example, the 2008 USDA Organic Production Survey identified
frequently used conservation practices such as using green manures and animal manures as nutrient
sources (65 percent of respondents), buffer strips (58 percent), water management practices (51 percent), notill or minimum-till (38 percent), beneficial insect habitat (32 percent), and rotational grazing (21 percent).
As the organic farming sector continues to expand in the United States, both new and established organic
farmers will seek NRCS assistance to clarify and meet their resource stewardship goals. The high diversity
and emphasis on specialty crops characteristic of many organic farms create both opportunities and
challenges for the conservation professional.
Environmental Benefits of Organic Farming Systems
While the environmental benefits vary by farm, in general organic systems can benefit environmental
quality in several ways:
• Soil.—Soil-building practices such as crop rotations, cover crops, organic fertilizers, residue
management, and minimum tillage are central to organic practices. These practices replenish soil
organic matter, feed soil life, reduce erosion, improve soil structure, and enhance nutrient cycling and
water retention.
A-4
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
• Water.—Well-managed organic systems rely mainly on slow-release forms of nutrients, which reduce
the risk of nutrient runoff and leaching. Enhanced soil structure, water infiltration, and better
nutrient retention also reduce the risk of water quality impairment.
• Air and Climate Change.—Organic farming practices increase the return of carbon to the soil, thus
removing carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere and mitigating global warming.
• Biodiversity.—Organic systems enhance biodiversity at several levels. A variety of seeds and breeds
are preferred for their greater resistance to diseases, climate, and pests. Producers employ diverse
combinations and rotations of plants and animals. The maintenance and planting of natural areas
within and around organic fields and the minimal use of synthetic inputs create suitable habitats for
wildlife.5
Environmental Challenges of Organic Farming Systems
Organic farming systems also present some distinct environmental challenges:
• Nutrients.—Organic nutrient sources release slowly, and it is difficult to calibrate application rates for
optimum production. A reliance on manure and compost to provide adequate nitrogen (N) for organic
crops can lead to nutrient imbalances, especially a buildup of excessive soil phosphorus (P). Inadequate
crop-available N, especially in early spring when the soil is cool, is a common production constraint for
organic farms. Legume cover crops can address this constraint without adding P or other nutrients.
• Tillage.—Without broad-spectrum herbicides, organic annual crop production is more reliant on
tillage and cultivation for weed management and seedbed preparation. This can lead to soil erosion,
compaction, and organic matter loss. Integrated, ecological weed management strategies, including
cover crops and crop rotation, can reduce reliance on cultivation, and additions of organic matter to the
soil can mitigate negative impacts of tillage. Awareness of this issue has led an increasing number of
organic farmers to implement flame weeding, mulches, reduced-till, and sometimes no-till systems.
• Residues.—Some specialty crop rotations may not provide sufficient crop residues to replenish soil
organic carbon or control erosion. Farmers producing high-value crops on limited acreage may find it
difficult to implement a crop rotation with substantial residue return because of financial or logistical
constraints.
• Transition.—The required 3 years free of NOP-prohibited materials can create an incentive for a
farmer to break sod if existing cropland has had recent use of NOP-prohibited materials, while areas in
sod have not (see appendix 2 of this handbook, for information about converting Conservation Reserve
Program (CRP) land to production). Breaking sod located on sloping land, highly erodible land (HEL),
or high conservation value (HCV) land, such as native grassland or prairie, especially raises concerns
about resource degradation.
Resources
Describing Organic Agricultural Production in Virginia: Results of the 2004 Farm Survey (Virginia Tech
Rural Economic Analysis Program) http://econpapers.repec.org/paper/agsvpturp/14844.htm.
USDA 2008 Organic Production Survey:
http://www.agcensus.usda.gov/Publications/2007/Online_Highlights/Organics/.
5 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. “What are the environmental benefits of organic agriculture.”
http://www.fao.org/organicag/oa-faq/oa-faq6/en/.
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 B-1
B. National Organic Program (NOP)
1. USDA Organic Regulations and Roles
Establishment of the NOP
Consumer demand for assurances regarding products marketed as organic led to the establishment of
organic certification programs in the 1970s. These programs were administered by private nonprofit
organizations and State departments of agriculture, which developed rules or standards for organic
production and handling. Although certification programs shared a common theme of allowing natural
materials and methods and largely excluding synthetics, differences among programs caused confusion for
producers and consumers. A widely recognized need for a consistent nationwide definition and standards for
organic agriculture led to the establishment of the USDA’s Organic Program. In addition to regulations, the
NOP Handbook provides guidance and instructions to help operations comply with the regulations.
Organic Food Production Act of 1990
Part of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (1990 Farm Bill), the Organic Food
Production Act created the NOP within the USDA AMS. After considerable public input, the USDA
published a final rule in December 2000. The rule went into effect in April 2001, and was fully implemented
in October 2002 after a waiting period to allow time for producers to comply with the new regulations.
Since October 2002, the word organic is regulated and all agricultural products labeled organic must be
in compliance with USDA organic regulations. Operations with $5,000 or more in gross sales of organic
products must be certified.6
According to the 2008 USDA Organic Production Survey, 10,903 USDA-certified organic farms and 3,637
exempt organic farms (annual gross sales <$5,000) managed 4.1 million acres and generated $3.16 billion
in annual gross sales. In that survey, 37 percent of organic farmers planned to increase organic production,
41 percent planned to maintain current levels, only 8 percent planned to reduce or discontinue organic
production, and 14 percent were undecided. As of 2014, the number of USDA-certified organic producers
had increased to approximately 12,000.7
NOP Requirements and Conservation
Organic producers and conservation professionals share a commitment to resource protection and
environmental stewardship. USDA organic regulations and NRCS technical and program implementation
guidelines reflect these commonly shared principles. Organic producers, not NRCS staff, are responsible
for ensuring they comply with organic regulations. However, numerous NRCS conservation practices can
help producers meet USDA organic regulations. Section D of this handbook for organic production systems
includes a table that lists Conservation Stewardship Program (CSP) and Environmental Quality Incentive
Program (EQIP) practices that can help producers meet USDA organic regulations.
For reference, the full USDA National Organic Program Regulations (7 CFR part 205) can be viewed at
http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&sid=3f34f4c22f9aa8e6d9864cc2683cea02&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/
Title07/7cfr205_main_02.tpl.
It provides specific definitions and information for implementing the organic program. Selected excerpts
from the USDA organic regulations are provided in appendix 1 of this handbook.
Guidance and Instruction
The NOP periodically publishes guidance and instructions on the interpretation of standards to help certified
operations comply with regulations. For example, the NOP has published guidance on the regulation
covering the use of seeds and planting stock in organic production. The guidance describes practices for
certified operations to demonstrate their efforts to procure all organic seeds; clarifies “equivalent variety”;
and describes the form, quality, or quantity criteria that need to be met before organic seeds or planting
6 Organic Trade Association. “US Organic Standards” http://ota.com/.
7 USDA National Organic Program. This does not include all certified operations (i.e,. handling operations). http://apps.ams.usda.gov/nop/.
B-2
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
stock for a desired crop or variety can be considered commercially unavailable. Other guidance includes
details on recordkeeping procedures and pesticide testing.
New guidance is first published in draft form for public comment. After reviewing all public comments, NOP
publishes finalized guidance in the NOP Handbook and in the Federal Register.8
National Organic Standards Board
The Organic Foods Production Act established a 15-member National Organic Standards Board (NOSB).
Members are appointed by the Secretary of Agriculture to serve a 5-year term. The NOSB must represent
the organic community as follows:
• Four farmers or growers
• Three environmentalists or resource conservationists
• Three consumer or public interest advocates
• Two handlers or processors
• One retailer
• One scientist (toxicology, ecology, or biochemistry)
• One USDA-accredited certifying agent
NOSB members also serve on standing subcommittees that develop recommendations for the full NOSB.
Subcommittees include: Compliance, Accreditation, and Certification; Crops; Handling; Livestock;
Materials; and Policy Development.9
NOSB roles
The NOSB’s main roles are to make recommendations about whether a substance should be allowed or
prohibited in organic production or handling, to assist in the development of standards for substances to
be used in organic production, and to advise the Secretary on other aspects of Organic Foods Production
Act (OFPA) implementation. In addition to the authority to make recommendations concerning additions
to the National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances (National List), the NOSB must also review
each substance on the National List every 5 years to confirm that it continues to meet all required criteria.
This is referred to as the “sunset” review. If USDA agrees with the NOSB’s recommendation to remove a
substance, then it may remove the substance from the National List. Changing the National List requires
USDA to complete rulemaking, a process that includes another public comment opportunity. The NOSB
makes recommendations on a wide variety of topics such as unannounced inspections at certified operations
or criteria for commercial availability when searching for organic seeds.10
Accreditation of Organic Certifiers and Organic Certification of Operations
The NOP itself does not certify farms and other operations as organic; rather a USDA-accredited certifying
agent, or certifier, provides the certification. Certifiers, which may be private, State, or foreign entities,
are responsible for certification. To become a certifier, an entity must submit a fee and application which
includes information relevant to the entity’s capacity to conduct organic certification. Once approved,
organizations are accredited for 5 years. An additional onsite assessment is conducted halfway through the
5 years and at the end of that period for entities that renew.11
8 National Organic Program. “NOP Guidance”
http://www.ams.usda.gov/rules-regulations/organic/draft-guidance.
9 National Organic Program. “National Organic Standards Board New Member Guide 2013.”
www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/NOP-NOSB-NewMemberGuide.pdf.
10 National Organic Program. “National Organic Standards Board.”
http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOSBHome.
11 National Organic Program. “FAQ: Becoming a Certifying Agent.”
http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/faq-becoming-certifying-agent.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 B-3
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Most farms and businesses that grow, handle, or process products that are sold as organic must be certified
to verify that they comply with the USDA organic regulations. If an operation’s gross agricultural income
from organic sales does not exceed $5,000 per year, it is considered an “exempt” operation. These operations
do not need to be certified in order to sell, label, or represent products as organic, but they must follow USDA
organic regulations and cannot use the USDA organic seal.
Operations that are interested in certification can work with any certifier to become certified in one or
more of four categories of organic products: crops, livestock, processed products, and wild crops. To become
certified, operations must complete an organic system plan (OSP) that describes their practices and
substances used. An inspector conducts an onsite inspection to determine if the operation complies with
USDA organic regulations. The producer must provide an update annually to maintain organic certification,
and inspections are conducted annually.12
International markets
Several other countries have separate organic standards and labels such as Canada, the European Union,
Japan, Korea, Switzerland, and Taiwan. Through trade agreements, organic products grown in the
United States may be sold in these countries as organic. There are only a few additional regulations that
producers should be aware of if they are interested in these markets; an operation’s certifier can help ensure
compliance with these regulations. For example, Canada requires livestock (except ruminants) be produced
according to specified stocking rates.13
Compliance and Enforcement
To ensure the integrity of the organic standards and use of the term “organic,” USDA enforces the OFPA
and standards in a number of ways. Certifiers verify compliance annually with an on-site inspection which
may be either announced or unannounced. Additionally, at least 5 percent of certified organic operations’
products are tested for residues of prohibited substances (such as synthetic pesticides) every year. Certifiers
and the public also may submit complaints of alleged regulatory violations to the NOP. If the violation is
confirmed through investigation, enforcement action may include (depending on the nature and severity of
the violation) product label changes, financial penalties of up to $11,000 per violation, and suspension or
revocation of the operation’s organic certificate.14
A certifier can take any of several steps to address instances of noncompliance by USDA certified organic
operations. The certifier may issue a notice of noncompliance for minor issues, such as inadequate
recordkeeping, or major issues, such as application of a prohibited substance. If necessary, a certifier may
issue a notice of proposed suspension to give the operation some time to work on the noncompliance, achieve
compliance, and be reinstated. If the noncompliance is deemed egregious, willful, or not correctable, a Notice
of Proposed Revocation may be sent. A certified operation may appeal a notice of proposed suspension
or revocation of certification directly to the USDA through the AMS Administrator.15 Finally, a written
notification of suspension or revocation may be sent when a certified operation fails to respond to the
previous notices.
Resources
The following resources provide additional information about USDA organic regulations including the use of
organic seeds and allowed materials.
12 National Organic Program. “Becoming a Certified Operation.”
http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/faq-becoming-certified.
13 National Organic Program. “Information for International Trade Partners.”
http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOPInternationalAgreements.
14 National Organic Program. “Compliance and Enforcement.”
http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOPComplianceandEnforcement.
15 National Organic Program. “Instruction: National Organic Program Enforcement.”
www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/4002.pdf.
B-4
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Association of Official Seed Certifying Agencies (AOSCA). http://www.organicseedfinder.org/.
Organic Seed Finder (Web site) lists sources of organic seeds and indicates when no organic source of crop
varieties with selected characteristics can be found.
Organic Materials Review Institute (OMRI) http://www.omri.org.
OMRI reviews and maintains listings of generic and brand names of fertilizers, soil amendments, pest
controls, and other inputs that are allowed, restricted, or prohibited for certified organic production.
USDA AMS National Organic Program http://www.ams.usda.gov/nop.
USDA AMS NOP Program Handbook http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOPProgramHandbook.
Handbook provides supplemental information to facilitate understanding and implementation of the
Standards, including Guidance Documents, Instruction Documents, and Policy Memos.
USDA NOP Guidance 5029: Seeds, Annual Seedlings, and Planting Stock in Organic Crop Production
http://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/5029.pdf.
Clarifies the Seeds and Planting Stock Standard (NOP 205.204) and its interpretation.
2. Overview of Organic Certification Process Through NOP
Transition to Organic
While production activities and documentation required by the organic regulations must be followed for
36 months prior to the first sale of an organic crop, producers are not required to be certified during this
transition period. Producers can, however, discuss organic requirements, including whether specific
inputs are allowed, restricted, or prohibited, with an organic certification agency during this transition.
In addition, there are numerous organizations that support producers during the transition and provide
assistance concerning what activities are required in order to achieve organic certification (see resources in
this section).
Land that has had no prohibited materials applied for 36 months is eligible to be certified as organic with
no waiting period. Documentation from landowners and operators of how that land has been used and
managed must be provided to the organic certification agency to verify there were no prohibited materials
applied. If the land is currently in crop production, the operator must document that any inputs, including
seeds and seed treatments, meet the organic standards. Certified organic seed is not required during the
transition.
Organic certification can be done on a field-by-field basis, as long as there are defined field boundaries.
There is no requirement that the entire farm be certified organic; a farmer may choose to manage both
organic and nonorganic fields. If a producer grows both organic and nonorganic crops of the same species,
the certifier will closely scrutinize the management, harvest, storage, and sale of these organic and
nonorganic crops. Buffer zones between organic and nonorganic crop fields need to be in place before the
organic part of the operation can receive certification.
There is no nationally recognized definition, labeling category, or market for crops during the 3-year
transition period. During this time, crops may not be represented as organic. Producers may state
truthfully that they are transitioning when selling direct to consumers, and there are some commodity crop
buyers that will pay a small premium for crops that are non-genetically modified organisms (GMOs) or are
grown without synthetic inputs.
Typically the producer applies for organic certification the first year they can sell an organic crop. When
applying for certification, producers must provide 3 years of land history to the organic certification agency
to document that the requirements have been met. If a producer has not had control of the land for all of
the 3 transition years, they will need to obtain a signed document from the previous operators of that land
describing what materials had been used as well as the crops grown and seeds planted. Many certifiers
provide a form that landowners can use to verify this compliance.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 B-5
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Organic Certification Agencies
Producers may work with any certification agency and all use the same USDA organic regulations.
Producers seeking organic certification for the first time will need to search and decide which agency meets
their needs. Other organic farmers in their region should have knowledge of certification agencies that have
provided satisfactory service.
Organic certification agencies are accredited by the USDA to perform organic certification activities by scope:
crop, wild crops, livestock, and handling. Producers should discuss which scope a certifier covers to ensure
the certifier can provide them with the services they need. Handling refers to any activity beyond raw
agricultural production on the farm and includes activities such as grain cleaning and food processing. Some
operations may be certified under two or more scopes.
The USDA’s AMS Web site lists organic certification agencies alphabetically by name as well as by State, at
http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/certifying-agents.
OSP and Application
A producer should begin working with an organic certification agency at least 6 months prior to the planned
sale of their first certified organic crop. The agency will send them a packet containing their fee schedules,
the organic regulations, and an organic certification application which may also be called the OSP. This
OSP covers all aspects of farm management and typically follows the organic regulation section by section,
asking questions that can be answered in narrative or multiple-choice formats. The OSP is extensive,
including a full description of inputs (ingredients, rates, and dates of use); crop rotations with 3 years of past
field histories and projected current year’s cropping plans; weed, pest and disease management; adjoining
land use and buffer zones; all equipment and storage used; and transportation, labeling, and sales records.
Depending on the complexity of the operations, the first OSP may take a farmer 4 to 6 hours to complete.
Updating OSPs in subsequent years may only take an hour to complete.
A producer sends their completed OSP along with a base payment to the certification agency. If all farm
management information, field maps, and input ingredient information is complete, the certification agency
reviews the OSP and then assigns the file to an inspector. If it appears the operation does not meet organic
regulations, the certification agency will typically discuss areas of noncompliance with the operator and
outline steps that need to be taken before the organic certification process can move forward. Once certified,
organic producers must update their OSP throughout the year.
Organic Inspection
To renew certification, the producer must submit
an updated OSP and have an onsite organic
inspection each year. Many certifiers have shorter
forms for the annual OSP update. Organic
inspectors may be staff of the organic certification
agency or they may be independent contractors
that work for a variety of certifiers. Depending
on the complexity and size of the operation, an
organic inspection typically takes between 3 to 6
hours. The organic inspector will verify the items
on the OSP, both with documentation and by
physically reviewing the fields, livestock, buildings,
and equipment. At the end of the inspection, the
inspector will discuss with the producer any areas
of concern or items that need to be submitted
before organic certification can be granted. The
inspector is an objective observer and reporter and
Figure 2 NRCS staff and producers discuss organically
managed lettuce seed production
B-6
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
does not make the final decision whether or not to certify an operation. Organic inspections do not always
occur the same time of year, although they typically happen when crops are growing or the activity being
certified (such as maple syrup production) is occurring. Organic certification agencies are also mandated by
the USDA to perform unannounced inspections on 5 percent of certified operations annually.
Review and Certification Decision
The organic inspector submits a written report to the organic certification agency along with any further
supporting documentation such as input labels or photographs where applicable. An employee of the
organic certification agency reviews these items along with the OSP and determines whether the operation
complies with USDA organic regulations. The certification agency will then communicate its findings with
the producer through a certification determination letter. The letter may grant organic certification, request
further information so that a determination can be made, or state a requirement that the farmer must meet
in order to receive or retain organic certification. Finally, the letter may deny certification on one or more
fields if a prohibited material had been used within 36 months of the planned organic harvest.
The operator may need to pay an additional fee to cover the cost of the inspection before receiving their
organic certificate. Once issued, the organic certificate remains in effect until surrendered, suspended,
or revoked. Operators typically use their organic certificates as documentation to prove current organic
certification to buyers at the wholesale and retail levels. The USDA’s AMS also maintains a listing of
certified organic operations on their Web site. This list is updated at least annually, and as of September
2015, AMS launched a new version of the database that provides more timely and accurate information
about certified operations. The new “Organic Integrity Database” allows users to search for any certified
organic farm, ranch or food processor, both domestically and internationally, and to view a new series of
summary reports.
There is an appeals process (section A-2 of this handbook) for certified organic operators and operators
applying for organic certification if they feel the determination by the organic certifier is not correct.
Resources
List of Certified USDA Organic Operations (USDA AMS NOP) http://apps.ams.usda.gov/nop/.
Guide for Organic Crop Producers (USDA AMS and the National Sustainable Agriculture Information
Service/ATTRA http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/is-it-an-option. This publication
provides a detailed overview of the certification process for crop producers.
Guide for Organic Livestock Producers (USDA AMS and ATTRA)
http://www.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/GuideForOrganicLivestockProducers.pdf.
This publication provides a detailed overview of the certification process for livestock producers.
Organic Crop Production Overview (ATTRA)
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=66. This publication provides an overview of
conservation practices and principles used on organic farms.
Organic Certification of Farms and Businesses Producing Agricultural Products (USDA AMS and ATTRA)
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=152. This publication provides an overview of
the certification process, who needs to be certified, and more.
OSP Template for Crop and/or Livestock Production (USDA AMS and ATTRA)
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=359. This publication provides OSP
templates for both crop and livestock production.
Guidebook to Organic Certification (Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Service (MOSES))
http://mosesorganic.org/publications/guidebook-for-certification/. Along with this guidebook organized
in a question and answer format, MOSES has more than 30 fact sheets detailing organic certification
requirements for various farming systems as well as describing a variety of organic production activities.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 B-7
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
How to Choose a Certification Agency & the Organic Certification Process (MOSES)
http://mosesorganic.org/wp-content/uploads/Publications/Fact_Sheets/07CertificationAgencyprocess.pdf
Organic Education Organizations
Ecological Farming Association-California http://www.eco-farm.org
California Certified Organic Farmers http://www.ccof.org/
Carolina Farm Stewardship Association http://www.carolinafarmstewards.org
Florida Organic Growers http://www.foginfo.org
Georgia Organics http://georgiaorganics.org
Illinois Organic Association http://illinoisorganicgrowers.org/
Iowa Organic Association http://iowaorganic.org
Louisiana Organic Association http://www.ibiblio.org/farmingconnection/index.html
Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association www.mofga.org
Maryland Organic Food and Farming Association http://marylandorganic.org/
Michigan Organic Food and Farm Alliance http://www.moffa.net
Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Service www.mosesorganic.org
Missouri Organic Association http://www.missouriorganic.org
Montana Organic Association http://montanaorganicassociation.org
Northeast Organic Farming Association—
Chapters in Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,
New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island and Vermont
www.nofa.org
Northern Plains Sustainable Agriculture Society-North
Dakota
http://www.npsas.org
Ohio Ecological Food and Farming Association http://www.oeffa.org
The Kerr Center for Sustainable Agriculture-Oklahoma http://www.kerrcenter.com
Oregon Tilth http://tilth.org/
Pennsylvania Association for Sustainable Agriculture https://www.pasafarming.org
Texas Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association http://www.tofga.org
Tilth Producers of Washington http://tilthproducers.org
Virginia Association for Biological Farming http://vabf.org
Wild Farm Alliance www.wildfarmalliance.org
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
This page intentionally left blank
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 C-1
C. Conservation Planning With Existing Organic and Transitional Producers
1. Nine Steps of Conservation Planning in Organic Systems
USDA organic regulations, organic production principles, and NRCS conservation planning objectives
align closely and include many opportunities for conservation objectives and organic regulations to be met
simultaneously. Although organic standards regarding natural resources do not set quantitative criteria,
they require the producer to maintain (not degrade) natural resources and encourages them to improve the
resource condition. The NRCS conservation planning process applies to all types of agricultural operations,
including organic farms. There are, however, a few considerations unique to organic systems that may
impact the planning process. This section focuses only on the issues and opportunities related to organic
systems, not the general conservation planning process.
Conservation Planning Phase I: Collecting and Analyzing Information
Step 1: Identify Problems and Opportunities
Organic farms are subject to the same resource concerns as all farming operations. However, there are some
resource problems and opportunities that commonly occur in organic systems (some challenges described in
section A of this handbook):
• Natural Resources.—There are a range of opportunities to work with organic producers as they are
required to maintain or improve the natural resources of the operation defined as the “physical,
hydrological, and biological features of a production operation, including soil, water, wetlands,
woodlands, and wildlife.”
• Natural Areas.—Organic producers are required to maintain or improve biodiversity and prevent
exposure of organic production areas to NOP-prohibited substances. In addition, many producers
would like to provide habitat for natural enemies (predators and parasites) of crop pests, and enhance
natural areas on the farm through the use of native plants. Conservation plantings such as field
borders, hedgerows, and riparian buffers established to protect water and soil resources and provide
wildlife and pollinator habitat, may also harbor natural enemies of pests and intercept pesticide and
GMO pollen drift from neighboring nonorganic farms.
• Nutrients.—In organic systems that exclude synthetic fertilizers, the use of plant and animal materials
for fertility can enhance soil health and biological activity. However, a reliance on manure and
compost to provide adequate N for organic crops can lead to nutrient imbalances, especially a buildup
of excessive soil P. Legume cover crops can address this constraint. Installing suitable facilities for
composting and manure storage can help organic producers meet organic regulatory requirements to
protect water quality.
• Livestock and Pasture.—Organic livestock producers must provide ruminant animals with pasture
throughout the grazing season, and prevent negative resource impacts from the livestock operation.
These requirements offer opportunities to implement livestock-related conservation practices such as
prescribed grazing, forage planting, and watering facilities.
• Tillage.—Without a cost-effective choice of allowed herbicides, organic annual crop production is more
reliant on tillage and cultivation for weed management and seedbed preparation. This can lead to
soil erosion, compaction, and organic matter loss. Integrated, ecological weed management strategies
that include cover crops and rotation can reduce reliance on cultivation. Cover crops and other inputs
of organic materials to the soil can mitigate negative impacts of tillage. In addition, more organic
producers are implementing conservation tillage, including no-till termination of high-biomass cover
crops.
• Residues.—Some specialty crop rotations (not limited to organic systems) may not provide sufficient
crop residues to replenish soil organic carbon or control erosion. Producers can integrate high residue
cover or production crops into the rotation, and can minimize bare soil periods through tight rotation
schedules and relay intercropping.
C-2
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
• Transition.—The required 3 years free of NOP-prohibited materials can create an incentive for a
farmer in transition to organic production to use formerly idle land for production. Previously unused
land may be sloping, HEL, or HCV land, such as native grassland or prairie, all of which raise resource
issues.
Step 2: Determine Objectives
USDA organic regulations requires organic producers to protect a wide range of natural resources, and many
producers seek to enhance resource conditions beyond the level of nondegradation. At a broad level, the
objective of a producer may be to develop an organic production system that addresses all resource concerns
and meets organic regulatory requirements. More specifically, a producer may want to develop riparian and
other natural areas for enhanced wildlife and beneficial habitat, native plants, or improved water quality
and aquatic habitat. Other producers may want to enhance vegetative buffers to increase the biodiversity
of the farm by providing habitat for beneficial organisms, produce organic milk from a 100-head jersey dairy
and address runoff issues of the farmstead, or produce both edible and feed-grade organic soybeans while
enhancing the soil’s health.
Step 3: Inventory Resources & Step 4: Analyze Resource Data
• Soil.—Due to the complex nature of many organic cropping systems, the use of the Revised Universal
Soil Loss Equation 2 (RUSLE2) and the Wind Erosion Prediction System (WEPS) to calculate soil
loss may be challenging. Ensure that appropriate tillage operations are selected. Cover crops and
applications of compost and other organic materials can mitigate the negative impacts of tillage. See
RUSLE 2 in Organic Systems webinar for more information.
• Water.—Use of slow-release sources of crop nutrients in organic systems can reduce risks to water
quality. However, heavy reliance on compost and manure for fertility, especially when application
rates are not closely matched to plant needs, may lead to excessive P or soluble N and negative impacts
on water quality. Some organic producers use pest control substances such as pyrethrum, azadirachtin,
and spinosad, which can present a risk to water quality that should be evaluated with the assessment
tool, Windows Pesticide Screening Tool: (WIN-PST).
• Air.—Organic producers near conventionally managed land (farmland, residential, commercial land,
etc.) are often concerned about chemical spray drift and airborne soil particulates that could contain
prohibited substances.
• Plants.—USDA organic standards require organic growers to emphasize prevention, avoidance, and
biological controls to deal with crop pests. This approach can reduce resource impacts of organic pest
management practices.
• Animals.—Organic livestock producers are required to have ruminants on pasture for at least 120
days during the grazing season, and to provide 30 percent of dry-matter intake for ruminants during
that period. Although USDA organic standards do not specify stocking rates, producers must manage
pastures to maintain adequate forage quality and quantity, and to protect water resources.
• Energy, People, and Environmental Law Compliance.—These concerns include many considerations
that affect all agricultural producers. NRCS can support producers by providing recommendations or
designs that are compatible with USDA organic regulations.
Conservation Planning Phase II: Decision Support
Step 5: Formulate Alternatives & Step 6: Evaluate Alternatives
While developing the list of NRCS conservation practices that might be needed, consider those practices
within the context of organic systems whose implementation can be modified for greater conservation
benefit. For example, while many organic farmers use cover crops, they may plant only one species,
terminate the cover crop before it achieves high biomass, or terminate it by harvest.
When formulating and evaluating alternatives, it is important to consider USDA organic regulations that
may limit some options and affect costs of implementation. USDA organic regulations that may impact
implementation of conservation practices include:
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 C-3
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
• Unless specifically allowed, organic producers may not use synthetic substances for weed, insect pest,
and disease control; fertility; and seed treatment.
• During transition to organic, the last application of NOP-prohibited materials must be 3 years prior to
the harvest of an organic crop.
• Producers must use organically grown seeds and planting stock unless they are not commercially
available.
• The USDA organic regulations do not allow use of lumber treated with prohibited materials if the
lumber will contact animals, manure, compost, plants, or soil that are parts of the organic production
system.
Step 7: Make Decisions
Once a client has selected a practice to implement, encourage the producer to contact their certifying agent.
Unless the practice is already included in their OSP, producers should obtain approval from their certifier
prior to implementation.
Section D of this handbook, has information and resources related to many conservation activities and
practices integral to organic systems. Please see the respective sections for details about implementing
those practices in organic systems.
Conservation Planning Phase III: Application and Evaluation
Step 8: Implement the Plan
Many States have developed organic job sheets for a number of practices. If available, use these job
sheets when installing practices in organic systems. Section D of this handbook ("Integral Conservation
Activities"), also includes implementation guides and other resources to support conservation activities in
organic production.
Producers are responsible for contacting their certifier to verify compliance of planned activities with organic
standards. They should ensure that plans and specifications for implementation of NRCS practices align
with USDA organic regulations.
Step 9: Evaluate the Plan
When evaluating the conservation plan and practices with the producer, assist them as they assess how
effectively the plan has utilized opportunities to address both their conservation and USDA organic
compliance objectives. In addition, help them look for any barriers to success that are specifically related
to the producer’s organic certification. Let your supervisor and appropriate technical specialists know if
practice standards, specification, designs, or job sheets conflict with organic regulations or organic practices.
Resources
The NRCS Title 180, National Planning Procedures Handbook
http://directives.sc.egov.usda.gov/OpenNonWebContent.aspx?content=36483.wba.
2. Technical Service Providers
In many States, NRCS technical service providers (TSPs) play an important role in conservation planning
in organic systems. Unfortunately there is often a lack of TSPs certified to provide this assistance. If your
State needs TSPs for conservation activity plans (CAPs) or other conservation work with organic producers
(described below), contact EQIP organic program specialists or other NRCS organic contacts listed here:
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/landuse/crops/organic/.
Resources
Becoming a Technical Service Provider for NRCS: An Introduction (Midwest Organic and Sustainable
Education Service (MOSES)) http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mZdq5z5hAu0&feature=youtube.
C-4
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
3. CAP Supporting Organic Transition (CAP 138)
CAP 138 helps farmers who are interested in transitioning from conventional to organic production by
addressing the natural resource concerns on their operation. As with all CAPs, to receive financial and
technical assistance from NRCS for completion, it must be prepared by NRCS certified TSPs.
CAP 138, which was revised for 2015, consists of three sections: Resource Inventory, Erosion Control
Inventory, and Summary Record of Planned NRCS Conservation Practices. The resource inventory section
may serve as a portion of an OSP, but it is not a replacement for the OSP. The information included in
the resource inventory can be relevant and useful in helping the producer apply for organic certification;
however, the producer is responsible for completing all of the OSP requirements not addressed by the
resource inventory. The AMS NOP worked closely with NRCS to develop the 2015 CAP 138 resource
inventory. The resource inventory, when submitted with the supplemental companion document "Resource
Inventory Supplement," contains all of the required components of an OSP. Current USDA organic
regulations do not require the use of a specific OSP. The use of the resource inventory and the "Resource
Inventory Supplement" is completely optional.
Some TSPs have voluntarily provided additional information needed to meet requirements of an OSP as part
of their deliverables for the CAP 138, however, NRCS payment rates do not include or address this extra
work. It is important that when approving EQIP CAP agreements that the participant is informed that
NRCS will not reimburse producers for any extra work provided by TSP beyond the CAP requirements and
the grower will be responsible for any additional charges from the TSP.
After receiving a CAP 138, farmers can develop a full conservation plan with NRCS and apply for
financial assistance to implement conservation practices or enhancements.
Resources
Conservation Activity Plan (CAP) 138 and OSP Supplements
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/national/programs/financial/eqip/?cid=stelprdb1262227.
4. Conservation Compliance
As with all producers, in order for organic producers to receive some USDA benefits (e.g., NRCS conservation
programs, including EQIP Organic Initiative, crop insurance, and farm loans, etc.) they must be in
compliance with conservation provisions for HEL conservation and wetland conservation as set forth by the
Food Security Act of 1985. USDA organic regulations also align with the intention of these conservation
provisions. As described appendix 1 of this handbook, USDA organic regulations require organic producers
to “select and implement tillage and cultivation practices that maintain or improve the physical, chemical,
and biological condition of soil and minimize soil erosion.” Additionally, producers must “maintain or
improve the natural resources of the operation, including soil, water wetlands, woodlands and wildlife.”
As a component of organic certification, all fields are inspected and soil erosion concerns are documented
by the organic certification agency in the annual inspection report. The certification agency may require
remedial action to address a concern and any mitigating activities will be reviewed and reported in the
following year’s organic inspection. In response to concerns regarding appropriate soil conservation practices
on organic farms, the AMS NOP began working with certifiers in 2014 to evaluate compliance with the HEL
provisions. The effort may result in training, tools, or potentially guidance on the topic. USDA organic
regulations do not require the use of tools such as RUSLE2 to measure erosion. To assess this, certifiers
typically rely on visual observations at the time of an inspection along with other indicators such as soil
tests, and management practices including crop rotations, cover cropping, and compost applications.
Resources
Highly Erodible Land Conservation & Wetland Conservation Compliance (NRCS)
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detailfull/national/programs/farmbill/?cid=stelprdb1257899.
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-1
D. Integral Conservation Activities for Organic Production Systems
Implementation of NRCS conservation activities offered through EQIP and CSP can assist organic producers
in meeting a range of USDA organic requirements. Some conservation practices can play an integral role in
organic systems and help transitioning organic producers bring their operations into compliance with USDA
organic standards. CSP enhancement activities that build upon these practices provide an opportunity for
organic producers to attain higher levels of resource stewardship.
The table below lists integral conservation practices for each of several USDA organic standards. Many
other NRCS conservation activities can contribute to effective resource conservation on organic farms
and ranches and nearly all offer USDA organic-compatible implementation scenarios. NRCS maintains
an Organic Crosswalk document for EQIP and CSP that shows the correlation among USDA organic
regulations, NRCS resource concerns, and relevant conservation activities.
Table 1 Integral NRCS Conservation Activities for Organic Systems
USDA Organic Standard Integral Conservation Practice
Standards (CPS)
Natural Resources & Biodiversity -
• Maintain and improve soil, water,
woodlands, wetlands, wildlife
• Conserve biodiversity
• CPS 395 Stream Habitat Improvement and Management
• CPS 612 Tree/Shrub Establishment
• CPS 643 Restoration and Management of Rare and Declining Habitats
• CPS 644 Wetland Wildlife Habitat
Management
• CPS 645 Upland Wildlife Habitat
Management
• And all practices listed in the following sections
Land Requirements -
• 3 years without prohibited substances • CPS 327 Conservation Cover
• Buffers and barriers to protect organic
production areas
• CPS 362 Diversion
• CPS 380 Windbreak/Shelterbelt
• CPS 386 Field Border
• CPS 390 Riparian Herbaceous Cover
• CPS 391 Riparian Forest Buffer
• CPS 393 Filter Strip
• CPS 422 Hedgerow
Soil Fertility and Crop Nutrient Management
-
• Implement tillage practices that
improve soil condition and minimize
erosion
• Manage nutrients through rotations,
cover crops, and use of plant and animal materials
• CPS 329 No-till
• CPS 332 Contour Buffer Strips
• CPS 345 Reduced Till
• CPS 585 Stripcropping
• CPS 340 Cover Crop
• Avoid contamination of crops, soil,
water
• CPS 590 Nutrient Management
D-2
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
USDA Organic Standard Integral Conservation Practice
Standards (CPS)
Crop Rotation -
• Including sod, cover crops, green manures, catch crops
• Control erosion, increase soil organic
matter, manage nutrients and pests
• Alley cropping, intercropping, hedgerows, etc., for perennials
• CPS 328 Conservation Crop Rotation
• CPS 340 Cover Crop
• CPS 311 Alley Cropping
• CPS 422 Hedgerow
Crop Pest, Weed, & Disease Management
-
• Crop rotation, cultural practices for
crop health
• CPS 595 Integrated Pest Management
• Habitat for natural enemies of pests • CPS 327 Conservation Cover
• CPS 386 Field Border
• Mowing, mulching, grazing, cultivation
for weeds
• CPS 484 Mulching
- • CPS 649 Structures For Wildlife
Livestock Living Conditions -
• Access to outdoors, sun, shade, clean
water, shelter, pasture (ruminants)
• CPS 311 Alley Cropping (shade)
• CPS 380 Windbreak (shelter)
• CPS 516 Livestock Pipeline
• CPS 576 Livestock Shelter
• CPS 614 Watering Facility
• CPS 317 Compost Facility
• CPS 367 Roofs and Covers
• CPS 558 Roof Runoff Structure
• CPS 590 Nutrient Management
• Manage manure, outdoor areas to protect water and soil
Pasture (Ruminants) -
• 30% of dry matter intake
• Pasture quality
• Minimize diseases and parasites
• CPS 511 Forage Harvest Management
• CPS 512 Forage Planting
• CPS 550 Range Planting
• CPS 381 Silvopasture Establishment
• CPS 528 Prescribed Grazing
-
• Fencing, shade, water
• Protect soil & water quality
• Prevent erosion
• Protect wetlands and riparian areas
-
• CPS 382 Fence
• CPS 390 Riparian Herbaceous Cover
• CPS 391 Riparian Forest Buffer
• CPS 657 Wetland Restoration
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-3
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
The following sections include resources that can help producers and NRCS field staff implement the
Conservation Practice Standards (CPSs) listed in the table above in the context of organic production
systems. The resources listed below are the most comprehensive and relevant to organic systems. In
some topic areas, additional resources were identified to provide more information and are included in the
appendix.
1. Nutrient Management
Organic growers rely on a healthy soil food web to release crop-available nutrients from soil organic matter
and organic amendments. To support this ecology, they must continually replenish organic materials in the
soil. Because synthetic fertilizers are generally not allowed in organic systems, the majority of nutrients
must come from plant-derived or animal-derived products, in which nutrients are combined with carbon (C).
In organic systems, the N and C cycles are closely linked and nutrients, particularly N, must be managed
with this in mind.
Compared to conventional fertilizers, most organic fertilizers have lower concentrations of nutrients and
act more slowly because nutrient release depends on the level of soil biological activity in order to digest
the applied materials. As a result, some portion of the nutrients will be released in years subsequent to the
application. In this context, implementation of CPS Code 590, Nutrient Management, may differ for organic
versus conventional systems. NRCS can help organic and transitioning producers to understand nutrient
cycling in their soil, develop nutrient budgets, and implement practices that support and build soil health.
Resources
Nutrient Management Plan (590) for Organic Systems: Western State Implementation Guide (Oregon Tilth,
National Center for Appropriate Technology (NCAT), NRCS)
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/landuse/crops/organic/
State-specific versions of this guide are being
developed for certain States; final versions will
be available here: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/
portal/nrcs/main/national/landuse/crops/organic/.
This publication discusses CPS 590 as a tool for
meeting the USDA organic regulations’ nutrient
management requirements and minimizing
environmental risks from applied N and P. It
covers major and minor nutrients, and how to
estimate N release from cover crops, past organic
inputs, and soil organic matter.
Soil Fertility in Organic Systems: A Guide
for Gardeners and Small Acreage Farmers
(Washington State University)
https://pubs.wsu.edu/ItemDetail.aspx?ProductID=1
5585&SeriesCode=&CategoryID=&Keyword=646.
This guide covers soil and nutrient dynamics in
organic systems and provides nutrient management
guidelines for wetter and drier parts of the
Northwest that take into account N credits for cover
crops, soil organic matter, and past inputs, and
environmental concerns.
See appendix 1 of this handbook, USDA Organic Production Requirements Related to Resource
Conservation, for the text of applicable regulations. In addition to regulations, the NOP Handbook
provides guidance and instructions to help operations comply with the regulations.
Figure 3 Roots and soil under organically
managed sudan grass cover crop
D-4
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Soil Fertility Management for Organic Crops (University of California)
http://anrcatalog.ucdavis.edu/pdf/7249.pdf. Written specifically for California climate, soils, and production
systems, this publication offers practical guidance on nutrient sourcing and N mineralization from soil
organic matter, cover crops, compost, and purchased organic fertilizers.
Managing Manure Fertilizers in Organic Systems (University of Illinois, eOrganic)
http://www.extension.org/pages/18628/managing-manure-fertilizers-in-organic-system.
This article covers USDA organic regulations regarding manure as a nutrient source in certified organic crop
production. It addresses food safety and environmental considerations, and provides protocols for manure
testing and determining application rates based on soil test trends.
Nutrient Management on Organic Vegetable Farms (University of Vermont) http://www.uvm.edu/
vtvegandberry/factsheets/Nutrient%20Management%20on%20Organic%20Vegetable%20Farms.pdf.
This bulletin covers practical nutrient management for New England organic producers, including crop
rotation, cover crops, and instructions for determining N, P, and K application rates, which consider
nutrient credits from cover crops, manure, compost, and mineralization from soil organic matter.
Sources of Organic Fertilizers and Amendments (The National Sustainable Agriculture Information Service
(ATTRA)) https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/org_fert/. Database listing suppliers of organic fertilizers, soil
amendments, compost, and mycorrhizal and other inoculants for compost or soil by State.
Using Organic Nutrient Sources (Pennsylvania State University, Sustainable Agriculture Research and
Education (SARE))
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/SARE-Project-Products/Northeast-SARE-Project-Products/WholeFarm-Nutrient-Planning-for-Organic-Farms. This resource covers how to: use a soil test report to guide
organic nutrient management and compost application rates, account for the slower release of organic
sources, provide balanced crop nutrition, optimize cost efficiency, protect water and other resources, and
meet USDA organic regulatory requirements.
See appendix 2 of this handbook for additional resources.
2. Cover Crops
The purposes of cover cropping (CPS Code 340, Cover Crop) in organic systems do not differ from those in
conventionally managed systems. However, the multiple functions of cover crops take on greater importance
in organic systems in which synthetic chemical fertilizers and pesticides are generally not used. Cover crops
can fix N (legumes); improve availability of P, K, and other soil nutrients; add organic matter and feed the
soil food web; protect the soil from erosion and compaction; suppress weeds and disrupt pest and disease
life cycles; and provide habitat for beneficial organisms. USDA organic standards cite cover cropping as an
important component of organic crop rotations and a key practice for soil and nutrient management. NRCS
staff can help producers by understanding the farmers’ goals for their cover crop, and helping them design a
cover crop mix that is manageable, economically viable, and that meets their needs.
Resources
CPS Code 340, Cover Crop, in Organic Systems: Western State Implementation Guide (Oregon Tilth, NCAT,
NRCS, Xerces Society)
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/landuse/crops/organic/.
State-specific versions of this guide are being developed for certain States; final versions will be available
here: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/landuse/crops/organic/. This guide discusses
the selection and management of cover crops for various objectives (N, organic matter, beneficial insects,
etc.), soils and climates, cropping systems, and seasonal niches in the crop rotation. It covers seeding rates,
planting dates, field preparation, and planting and termination methods.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-5
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Cover Cropping in Organic Farming Systems
(eOrganic)
http://www.extension.org/pages/59454/covercropping-in-organic-farming-systems. This Web
site houses an extensive list of guides, videos,
webinars, and other resources organized by cover
crop species and cover cropping purpose.
Cover Crops for Organic Farms (Center for
Environmental Farming Systems)
http://www.cefs.ncsu.edu/resources/
organicproductionguide/covercropsfinaljan2009.
pdf. This publication discusses cover crop species
best suited for the Southeast and their benefits
and drawbacks in relation to the region’s soils,
climates, and prevalent insects, pest nematodes,
and crop diseases. It also offers instruction
on cover crop planting and termination, and
estimating cover crop biomass, total and available
N.
Managing Cover Crops Profitably, 3rd edition
(SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Books/
Managing-Cover-Crops-Profitably-3rd-Edition.
This handbook describes how cover crops work
and how to integrate them into various cropping
systems for soil fertility, pest management, and
other purposes. A set of charts summarizes best
cover crops for different regions, seasons, and objectives; and advantages, drawbacks, planting rates and
methods for each cover crop species. Detailed chapters cover 20 of the most widely used cover crops.
Midwest Cover Crop Council www.mccc.msu.edu. Resource for cover cropping in the Midwest which
includes research, info sheets, cover crop selector tools, and farmer profiles about cover crop use in crop
rotations, including a few on organic farms.
Northern Great Plains Cover Crop Chart (USDA, ARS)
http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=20323. Chart organized by cover crop species which links
to a summary of information about that species.
Cover Crops for All Seasons: expanding the cover crop tool box for organic vegetable producers (Virginia
Association for Biological Farming (VABF))
http://vabf.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/seasonalcovercrops_sm.pdf. Information in narrative and tabular
form on the performance, benefits, and best planting and management methods for over 30 cover crops
evaluated for organic vegetable cropping systems in the mid-Atlantic and upper Southeast.
Reduced Tillage and Cover Cropping Systems for Organic Vegetable Production (VABF)
http://vabf.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/reducedtillage_sm.pdf. Recommendations for cover crop
management and no-till cover crop termination and cash crop planting for organic vegetable production,
based on research conducted at Virginia Tech as well as the mid-Atlantic and upper Southeast.
2013 Cover Crop Innovations Webinar Series (Pennsylvania State University)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/SARE-Project-Products/Northeast-SARE-Project-Products/2013-CoverCrop-Innovations-Webinar-Series.
This webinar series includes cover crops for organic no-till and reduced-till systems, interseeding, cover
Figure 4 Organically managed buckwheat cover crop.
D-6
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
crops for small dairy farms, managing beneficial and pest insects, nutrient and weed management in organic
no-till cover crop systems, and managing N with cover crop mixtures.
NRCS Cover Crop Termination Guidelines (NRCS)
www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/PA_NRCSConsumption/download?cid=STELPRDB1263099&ext=pdf. This
document describes guidelines applicable to all USDA programs that were developed by NRCS, RMA and
FSA.
See Section 4, "Crop Rotation," of this handbook, for additional resources.
3. Compost
Compost is an important soil amendment for many organic farms because it provides an inoculum of
beneficial soil organisms as well as humus, micronutrients, and slow-release N, P, and K. When farms or
fields with poor soil health and low nutrient levels are first brought into organic production, heavy compost
applications (10–20 tons per acre) can be the quickest way to improve soil fertility. Manure-based compost
may have relatively high levels of salts, as well as P, so the producer should ask the supplier to provide
information about levels of nutrients and salts, and conduct soil tests regularly to determine appropriate
compost application rates.
Organic livestock producers can optimize nutrient cycling and protect water and other resources through
proper composting of manure. NRCS can assist organic producers in constructing a suitable composting
facility (CPS Code 317) and applying compost in a manner consistent with sound nutrient management
(CPS Code 590).
Resources
Making and Using Compost for Organic Farming (University of Illinois, eOrganic)
http://www.extension.org/pages/18567/making-and-using-compost-for-organic-farming. This article
discusses USDA organic regulations and guidance regarding composition, production, and use of compost on
organic farms and briefly summarizes the composting process and farm-scale composting methods (windrow,
aerated static pile, in-vessel) with links to other resources.
Guidance: Compost and Vermicompost in Organic Crop Production (AMS NOP)
http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOPProgramHandbook. This publication reviews USDA organic regulations and
includes guidance about compost and vermicompost in organic systems.
4. Crop rotations
Crop rotations are required on organic farms and are used to reduce pest and disease problems, reduce
weed pressure, reduce soil erosion, build organic matter, and support a diverse soil microbial community.
Rotations that include several crops of different plant families support better soil health than simpler
rotations. A diverse crop rotation that includes legumes and deep rooted crops can enhance the efficient
cycling and utilization of crop nutrients. On sloping land, integrating a conservation crop rotation (CPS
Code 328) with other practices such as strip cropping (CPS Code 585) or contour buffer strips (CPS Code
332) can greatly reduce soil erosion and protect soil health.
Resources
Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual (SARE, Natural Resource, Agriculture, and
Engineering Service (NRAES)) http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Books/Crop-Rotation-on-OrganicFarms. Utilizing input from experienced organic farmers, this manual gives detailed guidance in designing
a crop rotation to improve soil health under different field conditions; manage pests, diseases, and weeds
for various crops; and support the transition to organic farming. The book lists problems and opportunities
for over 500 crop sequences, outlines pest and disease considerations for more than 60 crops and 70 weed
species, and provides 13 examples of crop rotations from working organic farms.
Crop Rotations on Organic Farms (Center for Environmental Farming Systems)
http://www.cefs.ncsu.edu/resources/organicproductionguide/croprotationsfinaljan09.pdf. This publication 
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-7
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
offers practical information on designing and implementing crop rotations to provide for soil fertility;
enhance organic matter; and manage crop pathogens, plant-parasitic nematodes, insect pests, and weeds
prevalent in North Carolina and elsewhere in the Southeast.
See appendix 2 of this handbook for additional resources.
5. Tillage and Residue Management
Without a cost-effective choice of allowed herbicides, organic annual crop production is more reliant on
tillage and cultivation for weed management and seedbed preparation. However, excessive tillage is
harmful to soil, accelerating organic matter degradation, disturbing and killing soil organisms, creating
compaction layers, and bringing weed seeds to germination depth. Residue management is closely connected
with tillage and there is an increasing focus on organic no-till or reduced till to support soil health.
NRCS staff can support organic farmers by advising them on reduced till and no-till financial assistance
opportunities (CPS Codes 345 and 329), as well as providing information on effective tillage implements.
Resources
Use of Tillage in Organic Farming Systems: The Basics (University of Illinois, eOrganic)
http://www.extension.org/pages/18634/useof-tillage-in-organic-farming-systems:-thebasics. This article describes the benefits
and drawbacks of different forms of tillage
and considerations when making decisions
about tillage and tillage implements.
Conservation tillage and no-till are also
discussed briefly.
Cover Crops and No-Till Management for
Organic Systems (Rodale Institute, SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/
Project-Products/Northeast-SAREProject-Products/Cover-Crops-and-NoTill-Management-for-Organic-Systems.
Description of cover crop-based organic
no-till systems developed at the Rodale
Institute for the Northeast and mid-Atlantic
regions including vegetable and agronomic
crop rotations, cover crop selection, rollercrimpers for cover crop termination, notill planting equipment, and energy and
financial budgets for no-till versus tilled
systems.
Pursuing Conservation Tillage Systems
for Organic Crop Production (ATTRA)
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/viewhtml.
php?id=107. This bulletin provides an
overview of organic conservation tillage
options, including mulch till, ridge till, ridge
zone/ strip till, killed cover crop mulch for
no-till, and living mulch systems. Examples
of innovative farmer applications of organic
conservation tillage are included.
See appendix 2 of this handbook for
additional resources.
Figure 5 Diverse mixture of vegetable crops on an organic farm
D-8
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
6. Integrated Pest Management
Pest management on organic or transitioning farms relies on the "PAMS" strategy: prevention, avoidance,
monitoring and suppression, with a strong emphasis on prevention and avoidance. USDA organic
regulations allow use of certain botanical and other natural pesticides as a last resort. NRCS conservation
planners can help farmers protect resources, manage pests, and minimize their need for pesticides by
supporting good soil management practices, which in turn support healthy, resilient plants. Crop rotation,
cover crops, organic mulches, and various conservation tillage practices are all part of an ecological pest
management system, as is supporting biodiversity above ground.
The goal of the CPS Code 595, Integrated Pest Management (IPM), is to reduce or mitigate the risks
associated with a particular pest suppression technique to specific natural resources (e.g. water, pollinators
and other beneficial organisms). This standard defines IPM differently than some producers, who may think
of IPM as a long-term system that focuses on prevention of pests through a combination of strategies such
as biological controls, cultural practices and resistant varieties. Some pesticides allowed in organic farming
can pose significant risks to natural resources, such as pyrethrum to fish, spinosad to bees, or any botanical
or soap-based pesticide to nontarget and beneficial arthropods. Implementation of CPS Code 595 in
conjunction with other practices can help the organic producer eliminate or mitigate these risks. Producers
should work closely with their organic certifier to ensure their pest suppression and mitigation practices are
consistent with their OSP and USDA organic regulations.
The organic approach of prevention and avoidance is consistent with the definition of IPM. In addition,
organic producers can avoid or reduce many pest and disease problems through other NRCS conservation
activities such as CPS Codes 328, Conservation Crop Rotation; 340, Cover Crop; 386, Field Border; 422,
Hedgerow; Water Quality Enhancement Activity (WQL21) IPM for Organic Farming; and many others.
The last purpose in CPS Code 595, IPM, addresses the risk that a cultural, mechanical, or biological
mitigation technique used in lieu of chemical methods to protect one resource may cause an impact on
other resources. An example would be tillage for weed control which replaces herbicide applications, but
which could adversely impact soil health. To maintain soil health, other practices such as CPS Codes 484,
Mulching; 328, Conservation Crop Rotation; 340, Cover Crops; or any of the residue management practices
could be used as well.
Resources
Common NRCS Practices Related to Pest Management on Organic Farms (Oregon Tilth)
http://tilth.org/resources/common-nrcs-practices-related-to-pest-management-on-organic-farms-2/. This
publication outlines the application of CPS Code 595, IPM, to organic systems and describes how several
other key NRCS practices that have primary
resource protection benefits can also offer
significant benefits to organic producers.
Biorationals: Ecological Pest Management
Database (ATTRA) https://attra.ncat.org/attrapub/biorationals/. This tool provides information
on organic and other pesticides as well as
preventive measures for common pests; allows
searches by pest, trade name, or active ingredient;
has links to labels and manufacturer information;
and notes which materials are listed by OMRI
(Organic Materials Review Institute). Because
OMRI listings are frequently updated, organic
producers should check with their certifiers
prior to applying any materials to their crops or
livestock.
Figure 6 Roller crimper
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-9
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Farming with Native Beneficial Insects (Xerces Society)
http://www.xerces.org/farming-with-native-beneficial-insects/. A comprehensive guide that discusses the
ecology of native beneficial insects and demonstrates how to create a farm or garden habitat that will attract
beneficial insects.
Manage Insects on Your Farm: A Guide to Ecological Strategies (SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Books/Manage-Insects-on-Your-Farm. This book covers ecological
pest management practices used on organic farms such as improving soil health, building and managing
plant and microbial biodiversity, cover cropping, beneficial habitat, hedgerows, and trap cropping. It
includes photo illustrations of pests and their natural enemies and many farm stories of successful practical
applications.
A Whole-Farm Approach to Managing Pests (SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Bulletins/A-Whole-Farm-Approach-to-Managing-Pests. This
bulletin covers field border plantings and other farmscaping methods among a full range of ecological pest
management practices such as crop rotation, cover cropping, and tillage and residue management. It
showcases successful field applications by farmers from different regions.
Steel in the Field: a Farmer’s Guide to Weed Management Tools (SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Books/Steel-in-the-Field. Describes a wide range of cultivation tools
available for mechanical weed control. The book also covers cost-effective weed-management strategies that
integrate improved cultivation tools with cover crops and crop rotations that can help organic producers get
the most weed suppression for the least soil disturbance.
Resource Guide for Organic Insect and Disease Management, 2nd Edition (SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Project-Products/Northeast-SARE-Project-Products/Resource-Guidefor-Organic-Insect-and-Disease-Management. This manual provides in-depth information on organic
management of vegetable crop pests and diseases in the Northeast, including cultural controls and NOPallowed materials for each major pest and pathogen; a photo section to assist identification; and material
fact sheets for 17 classes of biological, botanical, mineral, and other NOP-approved materials.
Biointensive Integrated Pest Management ( ATTRA) https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html#pests. Includes
biointensive or high-level IPM that utilizes ecological principles to understand and manage pests within
the context of the whole farm, including crops, pests and their natural enemies, soil life, livestock, etc. This
manual covers planning based on knowledge of pest and
beneficial life cycles, cropping system design, sanitation and
other preventive cultural practices, and physical, mechanical,
biological, and chemical controls.
Farmscaping to Enhance Biological Control (ATTRA) https://
attra.ncat.org/organic.html#pests. This bulletin gives indepth guidance on developing a beneficial insect habitat
based on farmer objectives, crops grown, prevalent pests
and natural enemies, and characteristics of various annual
and perennial insectary plants. It also covers habitat
for predatory birds and bats, and includes an annotated
bibliography of information resources.
See appendix 2 of this handbook for additional resources
that address mammal pest management, weed and invasive
species control, solarization for site preparation, and
prescribed grazing for invasive plant control.
Figure 7 Flowers from dill
D-10
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
7. Buffers and Natural Areas
Conservation buffers and natural areas support compliance with USDA organic regulations concerning
natural resources and biodiversity while aiding in production goals. Although buffers are generally
designed for other purposes, such as erosion control, some organic producers also use them to reduce
pesticide and pollen transport. There are several NRCS buffer practices listed in table 1 that can help
producers meet their objectives such as CPS Codes 422, Hedgerows, and 386, Field Borders. CPS Codes
362, Diversions, and 412, Grassed Waterways, are used to divert and convey runoff water, and are relevant
because they can help organic growers meet USDA organic regulatory requirements to protect organic crops
against prohibited substances or other pollutants from off-farm sources.
Natural areas are nonagricultural areas that support ecological processes and native species. Since not
all organic growers enroll their natural areas in organic certification, the requirement to meet the USDA
organic regulations for maintaining and improving soil, water, wetlands, woodlands, and wildlife in these
areas depends on the certification status. Conservation of the natural areas may significantly improve food,
shelter, and reproduction sites for wildlife, sequester carbon in woody biomass, filter pollutants, conserve
water, dissipate floodwaters, serve as wildlife corridors, and support rare species. Several NRCS buffer
practices listed in table 1 can help producers meet their objectives, such as CPS Codes 395, Stream Habitat
Improvement and Management, and 612, Tree/Shrub Establishment.
A number of practices can be used to prevent or control invasive species and weeds, such as CPS Codes 314,
Brush Management, and 315, Herbaceous Weed Control.
While buffers and natural areas do not typically produce organic food and fiber, producers must ensure
they comply with USDA organic regulations. They should recognize the restrictions on synthetic pesticides,
treated wood, plastic mulches, and burning under certain conditions. By first checking in with the certifier
before planting the buffer or restoring the natural area, the producer will ensure they are in compliance.
Resources
Biodiversity and Natural Resources Management
Biodiversity Conservation: An Organic Farmer’s Guide (Wild Farm Alliance (WFA))
http://wildfarmalliance.org/resources/BD%20Guide%20Organic%20Farmers%20.pdf. Includes a range of
farm management practices that maintain and enhance biodiversity as they relate to the USDA organic
regulations.
How NRCS TSPs Support Biodiversity in Organic Systems (WFA, MOSES, Hedgerows Unlimited)
http://www.wildfarmalliance.org/resources/organic_BD.htm#WebinarTSPs. This webinar covers how TSPs
can write conservation plans for practices that address the biodiversity conservation needs of the farm
including those offered in the CAP 138 development criteria list for transitioning farmers, and others that
support woodland, wetlands, and wildlife habitat.
Increasing Plant and Soil Biodiversity on Organic Farmscapes (University of California at Davis, eOrganic)
http://www.extension.org/pages/27049/increasing-plant-and-soil-biodiversity-on-organic-farmscapeswebinar#.U-0yukj8W58. This webinar examines research results from a case study in California on an
organic farm with hedgerows, preservation of a riparian corridor, and tailwater ponds.
Linking Biodiversity Requirements, Organic Systems, and NRCS Conservation Practice Standards (WFA,
University of Minnesota, Live Earth Farm)
http://wildfarmalliance.org/resources/organic_BD.htm#Webinar-1. CPSs that improve soil and water
resources, support beneficial organisms and natural functions, and protect and restore wildlife habitat are
covered in this webinar, and real-life examples of practices used by an organic farmer on his operations.
Promoting High Quality Conservation on the Organic Farm (WFA, MOSES)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HENSvtveY0U&feature=youtu.be. This webinar describes how NRCS 
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-11
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
conservation practices and enhancements can provide high-value production and biodiversity benefits while
at the same time aiding producers in obtaining or maintaining their USDA organic status.
Buffers
Conservation Buffers in Organic Systems (NCAT, Oregon Tilth, Xerces Society)
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/landuse/crops/organic/. This publication covers
design, preparation and maintenance of NRCS field borders, hedgerow plantings, herbaceous wind barriers,
windbreaks/shelterbelt establishment, riparian forest buffers, and conservation cover.
Conservation Buffers: Design Guidelines for Buffers, Corridors, and Greenways (National Agroforestry
Center) http://nac.unl.edu/buffers/index.html. This publication provides over 80 illustrated design
guidelines which describe how a vegetative buffer can be applied to protect soil, improve air and water
quality, enhance fish and wildlife habitat, or meet other objectives.
Hedgerows for California Agriculture (Community Alliance with Family Farmers)
http://caff.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/07/Hedgerow_manual.pdf. This manual helps growers choose and
care for appropriate plants that attract beneficial insects and prevent erosion.
Protecting Riparian Areas: Farmland Management Strategies (ATTRA)
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=115. This publication is designed to help
farmers, watershed managers, and environmentalists understand what healthy riparian areas look like,
how they operate, and why they are important for the environment and society. It also discusses the costs
and benefits of riparian management, and how watershed residents can work together to protect this vital
resource.
Co-Managing Food Safety and Conservation
A Farmer's Guide to Food Safety and
Conservation: Facts, Tips and Frequently
Asked Questions (WFA, CAFF) http://www.
wildfarmalliance.org/resources/FS_FactsTipsFAQ.
pdf. This publication discusses basic factors
that affect the survival and movement of food
borne pathogens on the farm, and how healthy
diverse ecosystems can help to keep pathogens
in check. A set of frequently asked questions
addresses topics from wildlife and compost issues
to visitors on the farm. It provides tips on how to
have a successful food safety inspection, and the
resources list includes links to Web pages where
your auditor can learn about the co-management
of food safety and conservation.
On-Farm Food Safety and Conservation (WFA)
http://www.conservationwebinars.net/webinars/
on-farm-food-safety-and-conservation. This
webinar covers how pathogens get on the farm,
their prevalence in animals, and environmental
factors that influence pathogen reduction.
A multibarrier approach is discussed where
conservation practices and food safety good
agricultural practices (GAPs) are used to
minimize food safety concerns.
Figure 8 Plants in a buffer area attracting beneficial
goldenrod soldier beetles
D-12
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Pollinator Habitat
Pollinator Habitat Assessment Form and Guide for Organic Farmers (Xerces Society)
http://www.xerces.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/11/OrganicPollinatorHabitatAssessment.pdf. This guide
assesses pollinator habitat in orchards and field crop settings.
Organic Farming for Bees Toolkit (Xerces Society)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Books/Managing-Alternative-Pollinators. This guide contains both fact
sheets, as well as information about native bee biology, artificial nest management, and regional plant lists
for pollinator habitat restoration.
Pollinator Conservation Resource Center (Xerces Society) www.xerces.org/pollinator-resource-center.
This Web site provides information on pollinator plant lists, conservation guides, pesticide protection, seed
venders, nurseries, and more.
Managing Alternative Pollinators: a Handbook for Beekeepers, Growers, and Conservationists (SARE)
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Books/Managing-Alternative-Pollinators. The book includes expert
information on the business and biology of pollination, and color-illustrated how-to guidance on rearing
and managing bumble bees, mason bees, leafcutter bees, and other bee species that provide pollination
alternatives to the rapidly declining honey bee.
See appendix 2 of this handbook for additional resources including the IPM section for resources on weed
and invasive species control, solarization for site preparation, and prescribed grazing for invasive plant
control.
8. Organic Grazing
The USDA organic pasture standard requires the livestock producer to provide pasture of sufficient quantity
and quality to meet 30 percent of the dry matter (DM) nutritional needs of ruminants (cattle, goats, sheep,
etc.) for at least 120 days during the grazing season. The producer must provide, as part of the OSP, a
detailed pasture management plan adequate to meet these criteria, prevent erosion, and protect soil and
water resources, wetlands, and riparian areas. Implementation of CPS Code 528, Prescribed Grazing,
can help the organic producer meet USDA organic pasture requirements. Grazing plans under CPS Code
528 include pasture system maps, soils maps and information, typical grazing season or seasons, tools to
ensure and document adequate herd DM intake from pasture, and contingency management measures
such as reduced stocking rates, temporary removal from pasture due to weather, and supplemental
feed. Other conservation practices, such as CPS Codes 512, Forage and Biomass Planting; 511, Forage
Harvest Management; 550, Range Planting; and 381, Silvopasture Establishment, can help the grower
meet USDA organic requirements for adequate pasture and forage. Practices such as CPS Codes 390,
Riparian Herbaceous Cover; 391, Riparian Forest Buffer; and 382, Fence, in conjunction with CPS Code
614, Livestock Watering Facilities, to keep animals away from streams, can help protect water quality and
prevent streambank erosion.
Pastures, regardless of organic status, can become overgrazed, which can contribute to livestock internal
parasite problems, nutritional deficiencies, soil compaction, erosion, degradation of forage diversity and
vigor, spread of diseases to wildlife, and water quality problems; all of which an organic producer must
address. USDA organic standards require the producer to maintain pasture in a state of good health
and productivity through management strategies that promote good forage quality and quantity, weed
control, infiltration of precipitation, and erosion control. Some conservation practices for developing and
maintaining healthy and productive pastures include—
• Rotational grazing system and nutrient management appropriate for the climate and terrain. This is
not particular to organic, but rotation is vital to pasture health and reduced environmental impacts, as
required by NOP.
• Occasional mowing or mixed-species grazing to reduce weeds and stimulate growth of desirable species.
Avoid prescribing forage species that require burning for germination or maintenance, or allow for
alternatives such as grazing and tillage.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 D-13
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
• Establishment of desirable or more productive forages as needed. Some producers may include annual
plantings to extend the grazing season, provide forages during seasons when perennials are typically
less productive, or have animals deposit manure on cropland.
• Use of infrastructure such as animal trails and strategic locations of watering facilities, minerals,
shade, and supplemental feed to support pasture rotation and utilization.
• Infrastructure and management practices may also be used to meet USDA organic requirements to
protect environmentally sensitive areas in or adjacent to the pasture.
Ideally, a grazing system includes sufficient acreage to meet the maximum DM intake needs of the herd. In
instances where there is insufficient acreage, and where a reduction in stocking rate is not possible, daily
supplemental feeding will be required. In addition, diligent pasture management and rotational grazing
are essential to prevent overgrazing while maintaining as high a DM intake as practical. Animals must
be moved frequently and in accordance with planned target grazing heights, DM estimates, and targeted
postgrazing residuals. When circumstances beyond the producer’s control result in less than the required
30 percent of total seasonal DM intake being obtained from pasture, the organic producer must request a
written variance from the certifying agent.
See section 9 of this handbook for a discussion of USDA organic regulations related to fences.
Resources
Organic Standards for Livestock Production (ATTRA)
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=159. This collection of standards from the
USDA AMS NOP provides the reader with key standards relevant to certified organic livestock production.
Pastures: Going Organic (ATTRA): https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=179. This
guide discusses relevant USDA organic regulations, including recordkeeping; and fertility, weed, and insect
pest management.
Pasture for Organic Ruminant Livestock – Understanding and Implementing the USDA Organic Pasture
Rule (NCAT, USDA AMS NOP):
http://prod.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/NOP-UnderstandingOrganicPastureRule.pdf. This
publication explains the pasture rule and includes information on determining available DM on both pasture
and rangeland.
Calculating Dry Matter Intake from Pasture (USDA AMS NOP):
http://prod.ams.usda.gov/sites/default/files/media/5017-1.pdf. This publication describes DM intake and a
method to estimate it.
Grazing Management on Organic Farms (eOrganic):
https://www.extension.org/pages/59464/grazing-management-on-organic-farms. This Web site provides an
extensive library of fact sheets and webinars on organic grazing.
Guide for Organic Livestock Producers (NCAT, USDA AMS NOP): http://www.ams.usda.gov/organicinfo.
This extensive publication includes discussions about hay, silage, and haylage harvest; seeds and planting
stock; the USDA organic pasture rule; organic soil and weed management for pasture and hayland; and
grazing for parasite management.
9. Livestock Living Conditions, Facilities, and Structures
The USDA organic standard for livestock living conditions requires producers to provide all livestock and
poultry with year-round access to the outdoors, sunlight, shade, shelter, fresh air, exercise areas, clean
water, and adequate nutrition. Temporary confinement is allowed under certain circumstances such as
severe weather. Producers can implement practices such as CPS Codes 614, Livestock Watering Facility;
516, Livestock Pipeline; 380, Windbreak Planting; 381, Silvopasture Establishment; and 576, Livestock
Shelter Structure, as part of their plan to meet USDA organic requirements regarding water, shade, and
shelter.
D-14
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Organic livestock producers must manage animal wastes and outdoor access areas in a way that protects
soil and water quality. In some locations at certain times of the year, it can be a challenge to provide
livestock outdoor access “in a manner that does not put soil or water quality at risk.” Outdoor feeding and
confinement areas may require CPS Code 561, Heavy Use Area Protection, and other practices to protect
groundwater and surface water, and to allow for removal and management of wastes. A suitable composting
facility (CPS Code 317) can provide improved waste management and stabilize manure nutrients.
Some sites may not have sufficient separation from groundwater and surface water to provide treatment
of contaminated runoff from these facilities. In such cases, a roof (CPS Code 367, Roofs and Covers), or
CPS Code 588, Roof Runoff Structure, may be needed to prevent runoff from transporting contaminants
into nearby streams or lakes. In the event that site conditions demand a roofed heavy-use area to prevent
environmental impacts from a livestock confinement area, it is very important to work with the certifying
agency to ensure that the design does not conflict with the agent’s interpretation of livestock access to the
outdoors or to direct sunlight. In some cases, the producer may need to consider moving the livestock to
another site where they can be managed in a manner that will meet USDA organic requirements for both
livestock outdoor access and protection of water resources.
The USDA organic crop pest, weed, and disease management practice standard does not allow the use of
lumber treated with prohibited materials if the lumber will contact animals, manure, compost, plants, or soil
that are parts of the organic production system. New or replacement fence posts for pastures, and building
materials for animal shade, shelter or confinement structures, and composting and waste storage facilities
must be comprised of materials such as naturally rot-resistant wood, wood treated with NOP-allowed
materials, metal, concrete, fiberglass, composite, or other accepted materials. At the time of this printing,
raw linseed oil is the only NOP-approved wood preservative, but other products could become available in
the future.
When chromated copper arsenate (CCA) pressure-treated lumber or other treated materials must be used
for structures, the producer must provide a protective sheathing or setback to prevent livestock, feed,
hay, manure, or compost from coming into direct contact with the materials. When planning a structural
conservation practice on an organic livestock operation, it is very important to communicate with the
certifying agency to ensure that the design and materials will not place the producer in conflict with USDA
organic regulations.
Resources
Guide for Organic Livestock Producers (NCAT, USDA AMS NOP): http://www.ams.usda.gov/organicinfo.
This extensive publication includes discussions about hay, silage, and haylage harvest; seeds and planting
stock; the USDA organic pasture rule;
organic soil and weed management for
pasture and hayland; and grazing for parasite
management.
Treated Wood on Organic Farms (University
of Tennessee):
https://utextension.tennessee.edu/publications/
Documents/W235-H.pdf. This publication
discusses the USDA organic rule, alternative
materials, and other topics.
Treated Lumber and Wood (Ohio Ecological
Food and Farm Association):
http://certification.oeffa.org/certfiles/facts/
Treated%20Wood.pdf. This fact sheet
discusses common issues, alternatives, and
other topics.
Figure 9 Cows in sudan grass on an organic farm
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 App1-1
Appendix 1
USDA Organic Regulatory Production Requirements
Related to Resource Conservation
The following excerpts from the USDA organic regulations highlight those that relate to resource
conservation. Organic producers, not NRCS staff, are responsible for ensuring they comply with organic
regulations. The regulations listed below are for reference to illustrate opportunities to work with organic
producers and help NRCS staff better understand the regulations organic producers follow.
The full USDA organic regulations (7 CFR Part 205) can be viewed at http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SI
D=cbc7174c2bae4dac67b0935617cfa740&mc=true&node=pt7.3.205&rgn=div5.
NATURAL RESOURCES AND BIODIVERSITY
205.200—Production practices “must maintain or improve the natural resources of the operation, including
soil and water quality.”
205.2—Natural resources are defined as “the physical, hydrological, and biological features of a production
operation, including soil, water, wetlands, woodlands, and wildlife.”
205.2—Organic production is a “system that is managed in accordance with…regulations…to respond to
site-specific conditions by integrating cultural, biological, and mechanical practices that foster cycling of
resources, promote ecological balance, and conserve biodiversity.”
LAND AND BUFFERS
205.202—“Any field or farm parcel from which harvested crops are intended to be sold, labeled, or
represented as 'organic,' must: Have had no prohibited substances … applied to it for a period of 3 years
immediately preceding harvest of the crop; and Have distinct, defined boundaries and buffer zones such as
runoff diversions to prevent the unintended application of a prohibited substance to the crop or contact with
a prohibited substance applied to adjoining land that is not under organic management.”
SOIL AND CROP FERTILITY MANAGEMENT
205.203—The producer must: “select and implement tillage and cultivation practices that maintain or
improve the physical, chemical, and biological condition of soil and minimize soil erosion”; “manage crop
nutrients and soil fertility through rotations, cover crops, and the application of plant and animal materials”;
and “manage plant and animal materials to maintain or improve soil organic matter content in a manner
that does not contribute to contamination of crops, soil, or water.”
Raw animal manure must be “incorporated into the soil not less than 120 days prior to the harvest of a
product whose edible portion has direct contact with the soil surface or soil particles; or incorporated into the
soil not less than 90 days prior to the harvest of a product whose edible portion does not have direct contact
with the soil surface or soil particles.”
Animal manure may be applied at any time if it is composted through a process that “established an initial
C:N ratio of between 25:1 and 40:1; and maintained a temperature of between 131 °F and 170 °F for 3 days
using an in-vessel or static aerated pile system; or maintained a temperature of between 131 °F and 170
°F for 15 days using a windrow composting system, during which period, the materials must be turned a
minimum of five times.” Producers must not use “sewage sludge (biosolids)."
App1-2
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
SEEDS AND PLANTING STOCK
205.204—“The producer must use organically grown seeds, annual seedlings, and planting stock.” However,
when “an equivalent organically produced variety is not commercially available,” producers may use
nonorganically produced seeds. However, “organically produced seed must be used for the production of
edible sprouts.”
CROP ROTATION
205.205—“The producer must implement a crop rotation including but not limited to sod, cover crops, green
manure crops, and catch crops that provide the following functions that are applicable to the operation:
maintain or improve soil organic matter content; provide for pest management in annual and perennial
crops; manage deficient or excess plant nutrients; and provide erosion control.”
205.2—Crop rotation is defined as the “practice of alternating the annual crops grown on a specific field in
a planned pattern or sequence in successive crop years so that crops of the same species or family are not
grown repeatedly without interruption on the same field. Perennial cropping systems employ means such as
alley cropping, intercropping, and hedgerows to introduce biological diversity in lieu of crop rotation.”
CROP PEST, WEED, AND DISEASE MANAGEMENT
205.206—“The producer must use management practices to prevent crop pests, weeds, and diseases
including but not limited to: crop rotation and soil and crop nutrient management practices…sanitation
measures to remove disease vectors, weed seeds, and habitat for pest organisms; and cultural practices that
enhance crop health, including selection of plant species and varieties with regard to suitability to sitespecific conditions and resistance to prevalent pests, weeds, and diseases.”
Pests, weeds and diseases may be controlled through mechanical or physical methods, such as development
of habitat for natural enemies of pests, mowing, and livestock grazing. If these methods are “insufficient
to prevent or control crop pests, weeds, and diseases, a biological or botanical substance or a substance
included on the National List of synthetic substances allowed for use in organic crop production may be
applied to prevent, suppress, or control pests, weeds, or diseases.”
WILD CROP
205.207—A wild crop “represented as organic must be harvested from a designated area that has had no
prohibited substance…for a period of 3 years immediately preceding the harvest.” A wild crop must be
harvested in a manner is not “destructive to the environment and will sustain the growth and production of
the wild crop.”
LIVESTOCK ORIGIN
205.236—Livestock products that are “represented as organic must be from livestock under continuous
organic management from the last third of gestation or hatching.” Except, “poultry or edible poultry
products must be from poultry that has been under continuous organic management beginning no later than
the second day of life,” and “milk or milk products must be from animals that have been under continuous
organic management beginning no later than 1 year prior to the production of the milk or milk products.”
LIVESTOCK FEED AND PASTURE
205.237:—The producer “must provide livestock with a total feed ration composed of agricultural products,
including pasture and forage, that are organically produced and handled by operations certified to the NOP.”
“The producer of an organic operation must not: use animal drugs, including hormones, to promote growth;
provide feed supplements or additives in amounts above those needed for adequate nutrition and health.”
“Ruminant animals must be grazed throughout the entire grazing season for the geographical region, which
shall be not less than 120 days per calendar year.” Producers must “provide pasture of a sufficient quality
and quantity to graze” and to provide ruminants “with an average of not less than 30 percent of their dry
matter intake from grazing throughout the grazing season.”
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 App1-3
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
PASTURE MANAGEMENT
205.240—The producer must have “a functioning management plan for pasture.” The plan must include a
description of the “cultural and management practices to be used to ensure pasture of a sufficient quality
and quantity is available to graze throughout the grazing season…; the types of grazing methods to be used
in the pasture system; location and types of fences”; location and source of shade and water; “soil fertility
and seeding systems; erosion control and protection of natural wetlands and riparian areas practices.”
Pasture must be managed “to refrain from putting soil or water quality at risk.”
LIVESTOCK HEALTH CARE
205.238—“The producer must establish and maintain preventive livestock health care practices, including:
selection of species and types of livestock with regard to suitability for site-specific conditions and resistance
to prevalent diseases and parasites; provision of a feed ration sufficient to meet nutritional requirements”;
“appropriate housing, pasture conditions, and sanitation practices to minimize the occurrence and spread of
diseases and parasites”; “vaccines and other veterinary biologics.”
“When preventive practices and veterinary biologics are inadequate to prevent sickness, a producer may
administer synthetic medications.” However, a producer may not use any antibiotics, any substance that
contains a synthetic substance not allowed on the National List, any animal drug “in the absence of illness,
hormones for growth promotion…or withhold medical treatment from a sick animal in an effort to preserve
its organic status. All appropriate medications must be used to restore an animal to health when methods
acceptable to organic production fail. Livestock treated with a prohibited substance must be clearly
identified and shall not be sold, labeled, or represented as organically produced.”
LIVESTOCK LIVING CONDITIONS
205.239—The producer of an organic livestock operation must establish and maintain year-round livestock
living conditions which accommodate the health and natural behavior of animals suitable to the species,
its stage of life, the climate, and the environment. Including, but not limited to, year-round access for all
animals to the outdoors, shade, shelter, exercise areas, fresh air, clean water for drinking, direct sunlight,
and appropriate clean, dry bedding. Roughages used as bedding must be organically produced. The
producer of an organic livestock operation may provide temporary confinement or shelter for an animal due
to inclement weather; the animal's stage of life; to protect the health, safety, or well-being of the animal; to
protect soil or water quality; breeding; shipping; or youth projects.
“The producer of an organic livestock operation must manage manure in a manner that does not contribute
to contamination of crops, soil, or water by plant nutrients, heavy metals, or pathogenic organisms and
optimizes recycling of nutrients, and must manage pastures and other outdoor access areas in a manner that
does not put soil or water quality at risk.”
Additional USDA Organic Regulations and Guidance
The following paragraphs describe several other aspects of the USDA organic regulations that may have a
bearing on implementation of NRCS conservation programs and practices on organic farms.
COMMINGLING
205.272—“The handler of an organic handling operation must implement measures necessary to prevent the
commingling of organic and nonorganic products and protect organic products from contact with prohibited
substances.”
RECORD KEEPING
205.103—“A certified operation must maintain records concerning the production, harvesting, and handling
of agricultural products that are or that are intended to be sold, labeled, or represented as…'organic’.”
Records must “be maintained for not less than 5 years beyond their creation;” and “be sufficient to
demonstrate compliance with the…regulations.”
App1-4
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
THE NATIONAL LIST OF ALLOWED AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES
205.601–604—Nonsynthetic or “natural” substances are allowed in organic crop and livestock production
unless they are specifically prohibited on the National List. Synthetic substances are prohibited unless
they are specifically allowed. The National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances identifies these two
groups of exceptions to the rule that synthetic substances are prohibited and nonsynthetic materials are
allowed. For example, arsenic is a natural or nonsynthetic substance, but it is prohibited and thus on the
National List. Aspirin is included on the National List as a synthetic substance allowed in organic livestock
production to reduce inflammation. Some substances on the National List may only be used in specific
situations or up to a maximum amount. For example, when used as an algicide in aquatic rice production,
copper sulfate is limited to one application per field during any 24-month period.16
EXCLUDED METHODS: GENETICALLY ENGINEERED SEEDS AND INPUTS
205.2—In addition to being free from prohibited substances, products sold as organic must be produced and
processed without the use of “excluded methods.” Excluded methods include genetically engineered crop
seeds, seedlings, and planting stock, and biopesticides and other agricultural inputs based on or derived
from genetically modified organisms (or GMOs).
16 National Organic Program. “About the National List.” http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/ams.fetchTemplateData.do?template=Templat
eJ&leftNav=NationalOrganicProgram&page=NOPNationalList&description=National%20List%20of%20Allowed%20and%20Prohibited%20Substances&acct=nopgeninfo.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 App2-1
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Appendix 2
Additional Resources
Webinars on multiple relevant topics can be found at the NRCS Science and Technology Training Library
located at ConservationWebinars.net.
The following additional resources are also available on the topics listed below.
Section A. Overview of Organic Agriculture:
Resources concerning the conversion of Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) into production: Conservation
Reserve Program: Alternatives and Options (NRCS):
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/nrcs142p2_019293.pdf.
Factors to Consider when Bringing Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) Land or Idle Land Back into
Production (University of Kentucky): http://www2.ca.uky.edu/agc/pubs/id/id124/id124.htm.
Converting CRP Land to Cropland or Pasture/Hayland: Agronomic and Weed Control Consideration (Ohio
State University): http://ohioline.osu.edu/agf-fact/0024.html.
Converting CRP Fields to Grain Crop Production (University of Missouri)
http://extension.missouri.edu/p/G1651.
Options for Expiring Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) Land (Oklahoma State University):
http://pods.dasnr.okstate.edu/docushare/dsweb/Get/Document-7247/NREM%209016web.pdf.
Section D. Integral Conservation Activities for Organic Production Systems
1. Nutrient Management
Managing Soil Fertility and Organic Matter (MOSES):
https://mosesorganic.org/wp-content/uploads/Publications/Fact_Sheets/08ImportanceOrganicMatterToFertili
ty.pdf. Succinct summary of organic soil and nutrient management practices.
Manures for Organic Production (ATTRA):
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/summaries/summary.php?pub=182. This publication discusses the use of
raw and composted manures in organic vegetable production, including, environmental and human health
considerations, USDA organic regulations, and nutrient management for optimum, cost effective crop
nutrition.
Interpreting Soil Health Tests in New Hampshire (NRCS):
http://soilhealth.cals.cornell.edu/extension/pdfs/NH_NRCS_SoilHealthManagementOptionsTable.pdf. This
two-page table lists various soil-related physical, biological and chemical concerns, and short- and long-term
management practices including NRCS cost-share practices to address each concern.
4. Crop Rotations
Northern Great Plains Crop Sequence Calculator (USDA, ARS):
http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=10791. Program that includes information on crop
production, economics, plant diseases, weeds, water use, and surface soil properties to evaluate management
risks associated with different crop sequences.
App2-2
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
5. Tillage & Residue Management
Manitoba – North Dakota Zero Tillage Farmers Association: http://mandakzerotill.org/. Extensive Web
site with a strong focus on soil health, but not specific to organic systems. The Web site includes a link to
proceedings of annual conferences.
6. Integrated Pest Management
Agronomy Technical Note 5 (NRCS):
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb1043138.pdf. This note discusses practices
to reduce risks including measures to reduce the need for pesticide applications.
Agronomy Technical Note 9 (NRCS):
http://directives.sc.egov.usda.gov/OpenNonWebContent.aspx?content=32935.wba. This note provides
additional information on pollinators and pollinator conservation.
A Quick Guide to Establishing Wildflower Plantings for the Conservation of Beneficial Insects (SARE):
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/SARE-Project-Products/North-Central-SARE-Project-Products/VideoA-Quick-Guide-to-Establishing-Wildflower-Plantings-for-the-Conservation-of-Beneficial-Insects. This video
is an introductory guide to help establish wildflower plantings for the conservation of beneficial insects.
Ecological Farm Design for Pest Management in Organic Vegetable Production: Successes and Challenges
on Two Farms (eOrganic):
http://www.extension.org/pages/61953/ecological-farm-design-for-pest-management-in-organic-vegetableproduction:-successes-and-challenges#.U_KlpUj8X6R. This webinar describes how two farms increased
plant diversity though practices such as planting insectaries and hedgerows, and employed reduced tillage,
pest thresholds and crop planting timing to manage pests in vegetable crops with minimal or no spraying.
Ecological Understanding of Insects in Organic Farming Systems: Insects in Communities (Pennsylvania
State University, eOrganic):
https://www.extension.org/pages/18908/ecological-understanding-of-insects-in-organic-farming-systems:-
insects-in-communities#.U_Jm0kj8W58. This article describes ecological principles and community
interactions of insects.
Farmscaping to Manage Insect Pests (Michigan State University, SARE):
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/Conference-Materials/The-New-American-Farm-Conference/BreakoutSessions/Farmscaping-to-Manage-Insects. This PowerPoint presentation describes how to control insect
pests by arranging fields, forests and borders into an insect-managing “farmscape” that helps grow healthier,
more productive crops.
Farmscaping: Making Use of Nature’s Pest Management Services (Clemson University, eOrganic):
http://www.extension.org/pages/18573/farmscaping:-making-use-of-natures-pest-management-services#.U01rUj8W58. This publication covers farmscaping methods including the use of insectary plants, hedgerows,
cover crops, and water reservoirs to attract and support populations of beneficial organisms such as insects,
spiders, amphibians, reptiles, bats, and birds that parasitize or prey upon insect pests.
Managing the Soil to Reduce Insect Pests (Clemson University, eOrganic):
https://www.extension.org/pages/18574/managing-the-soil-to-reduce-insect-pests. This article addresses
some of the main elements of soil management that can help to reduce insect pest problems, including soil
and fertility management, below-ground biodiversity (enhancing the soil food web), use of mulches, and
sanitation.
Mammal Pest Management
How to Manage Pests (University of California)
• Pocket gopher: http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1058&context=vpc14.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 App2-3
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
• Deer Mouse: http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/pn74161.html.
• Vole: http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/pn7439.html.
• Rabbit: http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/pn7447.html.
• Ground Squirrel: http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/PMG/PESTNOTES/pn7438.html.
Exclusionary Methods and Materials to Protect Plants from Pest Mammals—A Review (University of
Nebraska): http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1058&context=vpc14. This paper
covers pest mammal management methods for organic and sustainable agriculture. It includes various
materials wrapped or tied directly on tree trunks; the larger loose-fitting protective cylinders or other
individual exclosures, shields, or bands to prevent access to the upper tree portions via the trunk; mounding
soil; or other materials around the base of trees to restrict feeding or to make the habitat less favorable to
pest species.
How can I control rodents organically? (ATTRA):
https://attra.ncat.org/calendar/question.php/2007/03/12/how_can_i_control_rodents_organically. This article
discusses trapping, habitat modification, predator control, and approved organically rodenticide materials.
Wildlife Compatible Fencing (Arizona Game and Fish Department:
http://www.azgfd.gov/hgis/documents/110125_AGFD_fencing_guidelines.pdf. Describes fence design for
landowners.
Wildlife Friendly Fencing (Montanans for Safe Wildlife Passage):
http://www.montanans4wildlife.org/wildlife-friendly-fencing/. This Web site has many publications on the
topic of wildlife friendly fencing and its role in maintaining habitat connectivity.
Weed and Invasive Species Control
A Management Guide for Invasive Plants in Southern Forests (US Forest Service):
http://www.srs.fs.fed.us/pubs/gtr/gtr_srs131.pdf. This publication contains thorough discussion of all
methods for controlling invasive plants, including mulching and other nonchemical methods.
Policy Memorandum: Biodegradable Biobased Mulch Film (USDA AMS NOP):
http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOPProgramHandbook. This 2015 policy memo describes how the USDA organic
regulations were amended to allow the use of biodegradable biobased mulch film in organic crop production.
Solarization for Site Preparation
Introduction to Soil Solarization (University of Florida): http://edis.ifas.ufl.edu/in856. This publication
includes steps, photos and frequently asked questions.
Soil solarization (University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources):
http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/TOOLS/TURF/SITEPREP/soilsolar.html. This site includes a listing of weeds
commonly controlled through solarization.
Soil Solarization, an Alternative to Soil Fumigants (Colorado State University):
http://www.ipm.ucdavis.edu/TOOLS/TURF/SITEPREP/soilsolar.html. This publication described the
method and includes a discussion of the impacts on weed, nutrients, and microbes.
Prescribed Grazing for Invasive Plant Control
Targeted Grazing: A Natural Approach to Vegetation Management and Landscape Enhancement (University
of Idaho): http://www.webpages.uidaho.edu/rx-grazing/Handbook.htm. A handbook on grazing as a new
ecological service.
Goat-powered Invasive Removal (Clemson University): http://www.clemson.edu/public/hunnicutt/goats.
html. Features ongoing research.
App2-4
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015
Prescribed Grazing in Practice (US Fish and Wildlife Service):
http://www.fws.gov/invasives/stafftrainingmodule/methods/grazing/practice.html. This site includes foraging
behavior, dietary preferences, and management for grazing animals.
7. Buffers and Natural Areas
Biodiversity and Natural Resources Management
Biodiversity and Natural Resources Conservation Guidance (USDA AMS NOP):
http://www.ams.usda.gov/NOP. New guidance expected in 2015.
Biodiversity and Organic Agriculture (University of Nebraska, eOrganic):
http://www.extension.org/pages/67368/organic-farming-systems-research-at-the-university-ofnebraska#part%205. Brief webinar on research related to the topic; part of series on organic farming.
Biodiversity Compliance Assessment in Organic Agricultural Systems (WFA):
http://www.wildfarmalliance.org/resources/Biodiversity%20Compliance.pdf. Publication that summarizes
major biodiversity noncompliance (with USDA organic regulations) indicators and details guidance outlining
positive compliance approaches.
Biodiversity Principles (BC Agricultural Council):
http://www.agf.gov.bc.ca/resmgmt/EnviroFarmPlanning/EFP_Biodiversity_Guide/2010_Web_PDF_
Documents/BiodiversityGuide2010_Chapter2_BiodiversityPrinciples.pdf. This document describes eight
agricultural biodiversity principles including importance of location and connections.
Incorporating Prairies into Multifunctional Landscapes (SARE):
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/SARE-Project-Products/North-Central-SARE-Project-Products/
Incorporating-Prairies-into-Multifunctional-Landscapes. This publication describes how prairies can be
incorporated into farms and how they affect nearby crops. Necessary steps and resources to establish and
manage prairies are covered, as are the various uses for prairies: livestock grazing, hay production, biomass
feedstocks, and carbon sequestering.
Agroforestry Planning, Practices, and Design (SARE):
http://www.extension.org/pages/67368/organic-farming-systems-research-at-the-university-ofnebraska#part%205. Resource includes a Handbook for Agroforestry Practices and Design, and a Training
Manual for Applied Agroforestry Practices.
Biodiversity for Climate Resilience (California Climate& Agriculture Network, CalCAN):
http://vimeo.com/90807898. This webinar discusses the climate benefits and additional environmental and
economic benefits of on-farm biological diversity in farm products and in the landscape, as well as some tools
and practical considerations.
Climate Change Benefits of Farmscaping in Yolo County (University of California at Davis):
http://agadapt.ucdavis.edu/farmscaping/. This Web page covers many specific ways in which farmscaping
can enhance system resilience to climate change, including carbon storage and greenhouse gas mitigation;
biodiversity, resilience, and adaptation; and practical constraints to successful farmscaping.
Effects of Climate Change on Insect Communities in Organic Farming Systems (Washington State
University, eOrganic):
http://www.extension.org/pages/66899/effects-of-climate-change-on-insect-communities-in-organic-farmingsystems-webinar#.U-00KUj8W58. This webinar outlines the potential for climate change to affect insect
communities, and their interactions with plants, in cropping systems. Topics covered include the effects
of climate change on biodiversity and the functioning of agricultural ecosystems, and the role of organic
farming practices in mitigating negative effects of climate change.
190–612–H, 1st Ed., Nov 2015 App2-5
Title 190 – National Organic Farming Handbook
Farming for Success in the 21st Century: Increasing Biodiversity (CalCAN):
http://calclimateag.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/BIodiversity-Fact-Sheet.pdf. This fact sheet covers crop,
landscape and species diversity practices related to climate change adaption and mitigation.
Buffers
Planting Habitat on Farms: Design, Techniques and Issues (Community Alliance for Family Farmers):
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A4YwpkOSVTA&feature=youtu.be&noredirect=1. This webinar shows a
diversity of projects, focusing on established practices and lessons learned from 20 years of planting habitat
on farms.
Pollinator Habitat
Xerces Society Pollinator Short Course (SARE):
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/SARE-Project-Products/Southern-SARE-Project-Products/XercesSociety-Pollinator-Short-Course. This presentation (PowerPoint slides) provides training on topics such
as principles of pollinator biology, the economics of insect pollination, basic bee field identification, and
pollinator conservation through land management practices, habitat restoration, and plant selection.
Maintenance of Natural Sustainable Riparian Communities Fact Sheet Series (SARE):
http://www.sare.org/Learning-Center/SARE-Project-Products/North-Central-SARE-Project-Products/
Maintenance-of-Natural-Sustainable-Riparian-Communities-Fact-Sheets-Series. Five extension fact sheets
based on a study of riparian ecosystems along the Middle Sheyenne River of North Dakota. Four of them
relate to proper grazing management of these ecosystems.
Establishing Native Pollinator Habitat Organically: Tips from our Experience at Kerr Center (Kerr Center
for Sustainable Agriculture):
http://kerrcenter.com/publication/establishing-native-pollinator-habitat-organically-tips-from-our-experienceat-kerr-center/. The Kerr Center faced many challenges and learned many lessons. They summarize their
work and recommendations based on their experience.