Accurate plant disease identification is the first step in designing effective and
sustainable disease management programs. The purpose of this guide is to provide
information on how to recognize wheat diseases and also to provide possible
management options.
Scouting for wheat diseases
Scouting provides information from which economically feasible and environmental
friendly management practices can be applied. Field scouting is conducted to: 1)
diagnose diseases developing; 2) determine severity of the disease; 3) determine
the need for treatment; and 4) assess the effectiveness of previous/applied control
strategies. When planning to scout, note the current and forecasted weather conditions,
wheat growth stage, agronomic practices (variety planted, time of planting) and field
history. A wheat disease-scouting calendar (pg 19) provides an estimated period when
certain wheat diseases are likely to develop.
In-season plant disease management
Fungicides are the only in-season plant disease management practice for managing
fungal diseases. However diagnosing diseases even when no in-season treatments
can be done is important for future seasons. Fungicides can be effective against fungal
diseases; however, timing and application of specific active ingredients are important
in order to realize the benefits of a fungicide application. Wheat fungicide management
practice is most economical when:
• Fungicides are used to manage actual disease risk rather than as a prescriptive
(“insurance”) application without a risk assessment; and
• Fungicides are used as part of an integrated disease management strategy and not
when they are the only management method.
Integrated disease management
Well-adapted disease resistant or tolerant varieties should be combined with good
cultural practices such as crop rotation, disease-free seed, control of weeds and
volunteer wheat, and optimal planting dates. A fungicide should be used after scouting
and when fungal disease pressure under current and forecasted weather indicates
continued disease development. The best timing for fungicide application in wheat is
at flag leaf, because the flag leaf contributes up to 75% to the grain yield. However,
where there is an early onset of fungal diseases such as stripe rust or powdery mildew
and where wheat is planted into wheat stubble, an early fungicide tank-mixed with a
herbicide may be necessary. To avoid chances of fungicide resistance development,
rotate fungicide modes of action within and between seasons, and apply fungicides only
when warranted.
Page 3
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Tan Spot
Caused by: Pyrenophora tritici-repentis
Disease period: Throughout the growing season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate
Left Photo: Tan spot symptoms on leaves. Right Photo: Tan spot resting spores on wheat straw.
(Photo credits: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and source of inoculum: Tan spot produces tan to brown lesions on the
leaves. Lesions can vary from 1/8 of an inch to ½ of an inch in length and 1/16 of an
inch to 1/18 of an inch wide. Lesions are often referred to as “lens-shaped” and are
surrounded by a distinctive yellow halo with a small dark spot in the center. Tan spot
lesions can coalesce, leading to larger areas of the leaf which are killed. In advanced
cases, tan spot can develop on spikes and some bleaching of the spikes may be visible
and the kernels will turn dark red. This change in color is known as red smudge. Red
smudge usually develops under prolonged wet periods or high humidity during kernel
development. Tan spot is usually more severe on lower leaves and then progresses
upward. The tan spot pathogen survives on wheat stubble and inoculum can also come
from wild grasses. The tan spot pathogen can infect wheat under a wide range of
temperatures but requires at least 6 hours of leaf wetness.
Management:
• Select tolerant varieties.
• Remove or reduce residues infested with tan spot through tillage (where practical) or
bailing wheat straw.
• Practice crop rotation to reduce the inoculum level within the field. Rotate wheat
with broad leaf crops.
• Use clean-disease free seed.
• Apply a foliar fungicide when disease pressure is high.
Page 4
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Powdery Mildew
Caused by: Blumeria graminis f. sp. tritici
Disease period: Throughout the growing season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate
Powdery mildew symptoms on wheat (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and source of inoculum: Powdery mildew starts as raised, white,
powdery spots on the lower leaves. The powdery mildew pathogen survives the
winter in plant debris left on the field. Secondary infection from conidia, a type of
asexual spore, can occur when these spores are blown by wind to other plants.
Temperatures between 60-70°F with damp weather are favorable for powdery mildew
buildup. Disease development is slowed when temperature is higher than 77°F. High
planting rate and high fertility increase the humidity within the lower canopy and these
conditions favor powdery mildew development.
Management:
• Plant wheat varieties with resistance/tolerance to powdery mildew.
• Practice crop rotations to reduce the risk of powdery mildew infection.
• Avoid over fertilization with nitrogen fertilizers. Use a balanced soil fertility program.
• Apply a timely fungicide if disease pressure warrants it.
Page 5
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Rusts
Leaf Rust
Caused by: Puccinia triticina
Disease period: Mid to late season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate
Leaf rust pustules on a wheat leaf (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and inoculum source: Leaf rust pustules are orange to dark reddishbrown, raised, and small (usually 1 mm or less in size), often found on the upper leaf
surface. You can distinguish rust pustules from other leaf spot diseases by rubbing
(smearing) your finger on the leaf surface which leaves a brownish color on the finger.
The leaf rust pathogen does not overwinter in the northern states, and for the disease
to start in any given year, new inoculum must be introduced from the southern states.
Light rain, high humidity, or heavy dew and temperatures ranging between 59° and 77°
are ideal for leaf rust development. Leaf rust continues to spread by means of windblown uredospores (from plant to plant and from field to field) until the wheat matures.
Management:
• Plant varieties with resistance to leaf rust.
• Apply a fungicide if the disease is established in the crop canopy and when weather
favors rust development prior to wheat heading. Crop rotation or other cultural
practices are not effective against rust diseases.
Page 6
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Stripe Rust
Caused by: Puccinia striiformis f. sp. tritici
Disease period: Throughout the season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate, severe if infection takes place early
Stripe rust on wheat (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Small, yellow-orange pustules arranged in rows
(stripes) on the leaves of wheat. Rows of pustules often resemble sewing machine
stitches. Cool, wet weather favors stripe rust development. Rapid disease development
occurs between 50° and 60°F when moisture is available, while temperatures over 68°F
for several days in a row inhibits disease development. Stripe rust needs a green host
(wheat, perennial grassy weeds) to survive and has been known to overwinter under
snow cover as dormant mycelium in our region. However, stripe rust inoculum blowing
into South Dakota from southern states in the spring plays an important role in the
disease development.
Management:
• Plant resistant cultivars.
• Apply a fungicide if weather promotes stripe rust development and wheat has not
reached flowering. Scout often.
Page 7
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Stem Rust
Caused by: Puccinia graminis f. sp. tritici
Disease period: Late season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate, severe if the cultivar is susceptible
Stem rust on wheat stems (left) and leaves (right). (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Stem rust forms large orange to red oval shaped
pustules on stems, leaves, and leaf sheaths of infected plants. At times, pustules can
also be seen on awns, glumes, and spikelets. Stem rust causes conspicuous tears in
the epidermal tissues of infected plants. Towards the end of the wheat growing season,
stem rust pustules will form black spores called teliospores. With increasing severity,
lesions can weaken the stem, causing lodging and prematurely ripened grain.
Like leaf and stripe rusts, stem rust spores are carried by the wind to the northern states
(Puccinia pathway). Stem rust develops under warmer conditions (79-86ºF) and 6-8
hours of free moisture (dew) on leaves.
Management:
• Plant stem rust resistant cultivars. New rust races develop most of the time. For
example, a new race of stem rust called Ug99 currently found in Africa and the
Middle East can overcome all known stem rust resistance genes. If a previously
resistant cultivar is found with moderate level of a rust disease, this could mean that
this resistance gene is no longer effective.
• Apply a well-timed fungicide to provide protection against yield loss caused by cereal
rusts. Scout often.
Page 8
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Stagonospora Leaf and Glume Blotch
Caused by: Parastagonospora nodorum (formerly known as Stagonospora nodorum,
Septoria nodorum)
Disease period: Mid to late season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate
Stagonospora leaf and glume blotch symptoms (Photo credit: (left) E. Byamukama, (right) Erik
Stromberg, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Bugwood.org)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Small lesions begin on the lower leaves as
irregular water soaked patches that will eventually develop into lens-shaped lesions with
dark brown borders. As the lesions expand, the centers will become lighter, necrotic,
and take on the shape of a lens. Mature lesions have small black dots (pycnidia) fungal
fruiting bodies which can be visible with a magnifying glass or hand lens. The fungus
can also infect the wheat head causing purple-brown blotches on the glumes starting at
the glume tip.
This pathogen overwinters on volunteer plants and on wheat stubble from the previous
season. Seed can also be the source of inoculum. Wet (12-18 hours of continuous free
moisture) and warm weather are optimal for infection. Optimal temperatures range from
68°F to 81°F. For this reason, this disease develops at a higher rate around the time of
heading.
Management:
• Plant varieties with resistance/tolerance to leaf and glume blotch.
• Practice crop rotation. A three-year crop rotation with two years of non-cereal crops
is recommended.
• A foliar fungicide timed at flag leaf emergence is effective against Septoria/
Stagonospora nodorum blotch.
Page 9
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Root Rot Diseases
Common Root Rot
Caused by: Bipolaris sorokiniana (also called Cochliobolus sativus)
Disease period: Early, but symptoms obvious after heading
Occurrence: Localized
Impact on yield: Low
Common root rot on wheat plants (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and source of inoculum: Common root rot pathogen causes dark brown
lesions on the subcrown. These lesions will eventually spread to encompass the entire
subcrown internode. Severe infection can lead to pre-mature ripening of the wheat
head. But most of the time this disease goes unnoticed when tillers are not prematurely
killed. Mildly infected plants have few tillers and may be stunted. The disease is favored
by dry, droughty conditions. The common root rot pathogen survives in wheat residue
and in soil.
Management:
• Crop rotation with a broadleaf crop such as sunflower, canola, soybean, etc.
• Plant resistant varieties.
• Use fungicide seed treatment where fields have a history of poor seedling
emergence and root and crown rots.
Page 10
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Fusarium Foot and Crown Rot
Caused by: Fusarium spp. (mainly F. graminearum)
Disease period: Early, but symptoms obvious after heading
Occurrence: Localized
Impact on yield: Low
Fusarium foot and crown rot symptoms on the lower node of stem (left), A leaf sheath removed
from an infected stem showing the pinkish color, a sign of the pathogen (right). (Photo credit:
Heather Kelly)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Fusarium crown and foot rot can develop from
the roots and progress up to the lower nodes. Roots are often brown, the subcrown
internode is discolored, and a chocolate brown or reddish-brown lesion often extends up
the plant stem. A pink, cottony fungal growth may sometimes be found in the interior of
the lower stem when it is split open. Fusarium foot rot also produces sterile white heads
and premature plant death. The severity of this disease is also worsened by prolonged
drought and dry conditions. Source of inoculum for this disease is infested residue.
Management
• Crop rotation with a broadleaf crop such as sunflower, canola, etc.
• Plant tolerant varieties.
• Use fungicide seed treatment where fields have a history of poor seedling
emergence and root and crown rots.
Page 11
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Take-all Root and Crown Rot
Caused by: Gaeumannomyces graminis f. sp. tritici
Disease period: Early, but symptoms obvious after heading
Occurrence: Localized
Impact on yield: Low
Take-all symptoms on wheat lower nodes and roots (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and source of inoculum: Roots, crowns, and lower nodes have a shiny
black discoloration. White heads are often observed on infected plants at or after
heading. Under severe infection, plants are stunted and ripen prematurely and these are
usually found in low laying areas of the field. The Take-all pathogen survives on infested
residue and in soil.
Management:
• Crop rotation with a broadleaf crop such as sunflower, canola, soybean, etc.
• Plant tolerant varieties.
• Improve drainage.
Page 12
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Head Diseases
Fusarium Head Blight or Scab
Caused by: Mainly Fusarium graminearum
Disease period: After heading
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Moderate to high
Fusarium head blight (FHB or scab) symptoms on wheat plants (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Bleaching of spikelets on the whole or parts
of the head. Pink or orange-red spore masses are sometimes visible at the base of
the glumes, especially during long periods of high humidity. The kernels from infected
spikelets will be shriveled, and are often discolored, ranging from pink to gray to light
brown. These kernels accumulate high levels of the mycotoxin, deoxynivalenol (DON).
Scab infection is favored by warm (75° - 85°F), wet weather two weeks before flowering
and continuing through the flowering period. Fusarium spp. overwinter as fruiting fungal
structures known as perithicia on crop residue from the previous growing season.
Management:
• Plant moderately resistant varieties.
• Practice crop rotation. Corn and other small grains are also hosts for the FHB
pathogen.
• Apply a timely triazole fungicide. Consult the FHB risk assessment tool to decide
on the need for a fungicide. http://www.wheatscab.psu.edu/riskTool_2011.html,
https://climate.sdstate.edu/tools/smallgrains/
Page 13
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Loose Smut
Caused by: Ustilago tritici
Disease period: After heading
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Very low
Loose smut symptoms on wheat (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Loose smut of wheat is observed as masses
of black spores in place of the glumes and kernels on the head. Often, only the rachis
remains after the spores are released. The fungus survives on the embryo of wheat
seeds and grows inside the plant after seed germination. Spores from affected heads
can be blown onto non-affected heads and cause infection during wheat flowering,
allowing the fungus to grow into the developing seed.
Management:
• Plant resistant cultivars.
• Use clean disease-free seed.
• Use a systemic fungicide seed treatment for seed harvested from infected fields.
Page 14
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Common Bunt or Stinking Smut
Caused by: Tilletia tritici and T. laevis
Disease period: After heading
Occurrence: Localized
Impact on yield: Moderate
Wheat kernels filled with spores of common bunt pathogen spores. (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Infected plants often produce fewer and smaller
heads than normal ones, and the heads of diseased plants are generally dark green and
retain their green color longer than healthy heads. Diseased heads tend to have a more
open appearance due to the expanding of the smutted kernels which causes a spreading
of the glumes. In heads infected with common bunt, the outer hull of the kernels will
remain intact, but the inside of the kernel will be replaced with brown or black spores
that have a fishy odor. During harvest and handling, the bunt balls will break open and
contaminate healthy seeds with the spores, as well as spread the spores and odor
throughout the seed lot.
Common bunt is normally a seed-borne disease, but the pathogen can also survive in
the soil and infect otherwise healthy, emerging seedlings. Smut spores that are adhered
to infected kernels germinate at the same time as the wheat seed germinates, and the
fungus invades the coleoptile before emergence. The fungus invades the young tissues
and becomes established in the tissues that eventually develop into the head.
Management:
• Plant disease-free seed, preferably certified seed.
• Use fungicide seed treatments.
• Planting winter wheat early (when soil temperatures are above 60 degrees F) and
spring wheat when soils have begun to warm may allow the seedlings to outgrow
the fungus and escape infection. Planting winter wheat too early may also pose
an increased risk of virus diseases and excess growth which may cause moisture
stress.
Page 15
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Ergot
Caused by: Claviceps purpurea, Claviceps paspalli and Claviceps fusiformis
Disease period: After heading
Occurrence: Localized
Impact on yield: Low
Ergot bodies in wheat heads (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Purple-black, hornlike sclerotia (ergot bodies)
replace one or more seeds in the head. Infected florets exude a sugary slime in sticky
yellow droplets. The pathogen survives as a hardened fungal mass called ergot bodies,
and in spring, wet, cool weather stimulates the ergot bodies lying on the soil surface
or slightly buried in the soil to produce spores that can infect the florets of wheat, rye,
triticale, barley, oats and wild oats, as well as some grasses. An ergot body can survive
for approximately one year in or on the soil, but for several years in dry storage. Ergot
bodies from previous seasons or from grass are the source of inoculum.
Management:
• Plant seed free of sclerotia. Certified seed can have no more than 2% maximum
ergot sclerotia for the registered class and no more than 3% for the certified seed
class.
• A triazole fungicide seed treatment may inhibit germination of ergot.
Page 16
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Bacterial Disease
Bacterial Leaf Streak/ Black Chaff
Caused by: Xanthomonas tranclucens pv. undulosa
Disease period: Flag leaf
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to moderate
Bacterial leaf streak symptoms (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: Infection starts as water soaked streaks or
spots on the surface of upper leaves which is then followed by a shiny glaze. Olive green
translucent streaks will develop into yellow-brown streaks. Brown, dry spots begin to
emerge on the surface of the leaf, usually beginning at the tip of the leaf or in the middle
of the leaf. In infected plants, black chaff can be present in the head and glume. Black
chaff occurs when the bacteria invade the glumes during grain fill and cause dark purple
or black streaks and spots on the exterior of the glume, hence the name black chaff.
The bacteria can survive on seed, debris and in soil. Inoculum is splashed during rainfall
onto healthy tissues. The bacteria enter the host plant through stomatal openings or
wounds. Droplets of bacterial ooze during high humidity periods may act as inoculum
for secondary infection. The disease can develop under a relatively wide range of
temperature (59-86°F) and humidity levels. Infection is enhanced by frequent rainfall
and warm temperatures.
Management:
• Use certified, pathogen-free seeds.
• Plant resistant varieties.
• Control volunteer cereal and grassy weeds around the wheat field to reduce the
inoculum pressure on the field.
Page 17
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Viral Diseases
Wheat Streak Mosaic Virus
Caused by: Wheat Streak Mosaic Virus (WSMV)
Disease period: Throughout the season
Occurrence: Widespread
Impact on yield: Low to severe
Wheat Streak Mosaic symptoms (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and sources of inoculum: The most common symptoms of WSMV are
stunted growth and yellowing. Infected plants will show yellow and green streaks
parallel to the leaf veins. Leaves will curl inwards and young leaves get “trapped” due to
the presence of a high population of wheat curl mites, the vector of WSMV. Symptom
severity can vary based on the cultivar of wheat, time of infection (fall vs spring
infection), and environmental conditions. Warm fall and dry and warm spring increase
symptom severity.
WSMV is spread between winter wheat crops by wheat curl mites (WCMs) moving off
volunteer wheat and grassy weeds to the emerging winter wheat in the fall and from
winter wheat, volunteer winter wheat or grassy weeds to the spring wheat in spring.
The WCMs are not visible to the human eye. When observed under a microscope,
the mites resemble small, white grains of rice with two pairs of legs near the head.
The mites rely on the wind for transportation from plant to plant. Warm temperatures
are optimal for mite reproduction. Temperatures near freezing will stop reproduction,
but will not kill the mites. WCMs overwinter near the growing point of winter wheat
or in perennial grasses as eggs, nymphs or adults. Spring wheat infection is heavily
dependent on the survival of mites during the winter.
Management:
• Destroy volunteer wheat and grasses at least two weeks before planting a new crop.
• Avoid early planting in areas with history of WSMV. Winter wheat planting should be
delayed until after mid to late September for optimum WSMV control.
• Plant wheat cultivars tolerant to WSMV.
Page 18
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus
Caused by: Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus (various strains)
Disease period: Throughout the season
Occurrence: Localized
Impact on yield: Low
Barley Yellow Dwarf symptoms on wheat (Photo credit: E. Byamukama)
Symptoms and source of inoculum: Symptoms of Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus (BYDV)
can vary based on the strain of virus present, the cultivar, environmental conditions, and
the growth stage at which plants become infected. Typical BYDV symptoms include
yellow, purplish-red discoloration of leaves, usually the flag leaf. Depending on the time
of infection, the symptomatic flag leaf may start to die from the leaf tip. Other common
symptoms include upright and stiff leaves, serrated leaf borders, reduced tillering and
flowering, small grain heads, and an inability to fill the grain. If plants are infected very
early in the season, severe stunting may occur and yield is most likely to be significantly
impacted.
Barley yellow dwarf virus is vectored by different aphid species. The virus is not seedborne, therefore the only means of virus spread is through these aphid vectors. The
aphids acquire the BYDV as they feed on infected plants and transmit it to healthy plants
as they feed within a field or when they are emigrating from other fields and hosts.
BYDV can survive between crop cycles in volunteer wheat, barley, oats and several
grass weed hosts, or in winter sown cereals.
Management:
• Plant winter wheat after the migration season of bird cherry-oat aphid to reduce the
risk of early BYDV/CYDV infection. Generally, planting winter wheat after September
15 reduces infestation of aphids and subsequent BYDV/CYDV infections.
• Plant varieties with low susceptibility against BYDV.
• Insecticide seed treatments may be a good strategy when winter wheat needs to be
planted early.
Page 19
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Wheat disease scouting calendar for South Dakota.
Disease
Wheat stage
Fall Winter Emergence Tillering Jointing Boot Heading & Flowering Grain fill
Tan Spot
Winter wheat
Spring wheat
Powdery Mildew
Stagonospora Leaf Blotch
Glume Blotch (Stagonospora)
Leaf Rust
Stripe Rust
Stem Rust
Fusarium Head Blight/Wheat Scab
Root Rot Diseases
Black Chaff/Bacterial Leaf Streak
BYDV
Winter wheat
Spring wheat
WSMV
Winter wheat
Spring wheat
Page 20
© 2018, South Dakota Board of Regents
Management of Small Grain Diseases
2018 Fungicide Efficacy for Control of Wheat Diseases
The North Central Regional Committee on Management of Small Grain Diseases (NCERA-184) has developed the following information on fungicide efficacy for
control of certain foliar diseases of wheat for use by the grain production industry in the U.S. Efficacy ratings for each fungicide listed in the table were determined
by field testing the materials over multiple years and locations by the members of the committee. Efficacy is based on proper application timing to achieve
optimum effectiveness of the fungicide as determined by labeled instructions and overall level of disease in the field at the time of application. Differences in
efficacy among fungicide products were determined by direct comparisons among products in field tests and are based on a single application of the labeled rate
as listed in the table. Table includes most widely marketed products and is not intended to be a list of all labeled products.
Fungicide(s) Efficacy of fungicides for wheat disease control based on appropriate application timing
